Secessionary hopes 

Snowballing to freedom

Mar 11th 2004 | KILLINGTON, VERMONT 
From The Economist print edition


A ski resort's revolution against taxation 
 
 
 

 
INVOKING memories of the revolutionary war, Killington, Vermont, has
decided to secede. Not from the United States, but from Vermont. In an
arcane fight against taxation without sufficient representation, the
ski resort wants to become part of New Hampshire. 

Killington's 1,100 residents fired their first shots in 1997 after a
law was passed ruling that public-school financing would be through a
statewide tax pool rather than local property-tax collection. The
town, which gives the state $20m a year in taxes but receives only
one-tenth of that back, challenged the new law, and a judge ruled in
its favour. But the state's Supreme Court overturned the ruling last
year. And the winds of secession began to blow.

New Hampshire, with its mott o and lack of personal income tax, is
accustomed to envy. The state appeals to libertarians and to such
groups as the Free State Project, whose 5,000 members (only 33 of them
from Vermont) would like to move to the Granite State. Killington's
proposal ha s says David Scanlan, New Hampshire's deputy secretary of
state.

Will maps be redrawn? It is unlikely to happen soon. First, the town
will petition New Hampshire's legislature. And then, in order to
change a state's borders, both state legislatures and Congress must
approve the plan. 

Making it even harder, Killington is 35 miles (56km) to the west of
New Hampshire's western border. If it joined the state, it would
become an island, making public services, such as policing, road
maintenance and education pretty difficult (though the town hopes to
continue to send its middle- and high-school students to a school in,
ahem, Vermont). To top the problems, the mountain whose ski slopes
provide the town's main revenue is owned by Vermont.

Nonetheless, history is on Killington's side. Originally, in 1761, the
town was part of the New Hampshire Grants round the Green Mountains,
becoming part of Vermont only in 1777. And in 1977, when the people of
Martha's Vineyard, a swanky Massachusetts enclave, rebelled against
redistricting and floated the idea of secession, a few states,
including rather distant Vermont, offered to take them in.


