America's monetary policy 

Overflowing 

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

Enough liquidity: it is time for the Fed to start raising interest
rates

NO ONE expects the Federal Reserve's open market committee, the
policymaking body of America's central bank, to raise interest rates
when it meets on March 16th. Indeed, a growing number of economists
believe rates will remain at 1%, a 45-year-low, at least until the end
of 2004. Yet the case for an increase is strengthening. 

The main reason why the Fed is expected to hold rates is the feeble
state of America's labour market (see article). In February, payrolls
rose by only 21,000, an unusually low figure for a briskly growing
economy. Not only would it be politically provocative to raise
ratesonetary policy is the loosest for 30 years.

There are several ways to test the tightness of monetary policy. One
is the level of real interest rates, which are currently around zero
(using the core rate of inflation). This is in fact no lower than in
1993, when the Fed also faced a jobless recovery. However, some
economists argue that a better gauge is a comparison of interest rates
not with inflation but with nominal GDP growth. As a rule of thumb,
when rates are above nominal GDP growth, monetary policy is
restrictive; when rates are below it, policy is expansionary. 

 
 
 

 
One way to interpret this is to see America's nominal GDP growth as a
proxy for the average return on investment in America Inc. If this
return is higher than the cost of borrowing, investment and growth
will expand. Nominal GDP is rising at an annual rate of 6%, five
percentage points above the federal funds rate (see chart). This gap
is wider than at any time since the 1970s when inflation took off. 

Another useful measure is Goldman Sachs's financial conditions
index. This takes account not only of real interest rates, but also of
bond yields, the dollar and the stockmarket. In February the index hit
its lowest point in the 35 years it covers, implying that monetary
conditions are extremely loose.



Level pegging
It is popularly argued that central banks should raise interest rates
if inflation exceeds its target, and cut them if inflation falls
below, but otherwise keep them constant. But this is wrong. Glenn
Stevens, the deputy governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, neatly
explained why in a recent speech focused on his own country. It is, he
argued, the level of interest rates that matters most for the stance
of monetary policy, not the direction of change. Monetary policy does
not stop working when rates stay constant. A low interest rate will
continue to stimulate the economy and will eventually produce
ever-rising inflation. Apply Mr Stevens's argument to America: even if
rates were raised by a full percentage point, monetary policy would
still be expansionary. 

Once the circumstances that required super-low American interest
ratesommodities, along with a weak dollar, may push up the headline
rate of inflation, but wage demands remain moderate. Better still,
inflation may stay low because central banks have done a good job in
the past: the Fed's reputation is now so strong that households and
investors have much lower expectations of inflation than in the past. 

Nevertheless, all the liquidity being pumped out by the Fed's lax
policy has to flow somewhere. It may not be showing up in conventional
inflation, but it could be encouraging asset-price bubbles and excess
credit growth. In the fourth quarter American house prices rose at
their fastest rate for almost 25 years (see next article); share
prices have been booming again; and interest-rate spreads look
indecently low as investors desperately seek higher returns, seemingly
heedless of the risk. 

In recent weeks, Mr Greenspan and other Fed officials have started to
send out warnings that interest rates will eventually need to rise,
but with no great sense of urgency. In contrast, Stephen Roach, the
chief economist at Morgan Stanley, has called on the Fed to raise
interest rates immediately by two percentage points. This, he argues,
is needed not only to avoid bubbles but also to give the Fed
ammunition with which to fight the next economic shock. At current
interest rates, the Fed would have no room to cut rates if the economy
took a turn for the worse.

Mr Roach's favoured interest rate of 3% would, in theory, still leave
policy accommodative. But such a sharp rise could easily cause the
next shock, sending the prices of homes, shares and bond prices
tumbling. The Fed would do better to act gradually. But it needs to
start now. 

The Fed faces a difficult choice. A rise in interest rates when
employment is barely growing would provoke sharp criticism. If it
triggered a slide in share or house prices, recession could even
ensue. On the other hand, the longer the Fed leaves rates so low, the
greater the risk that asset prices will inflate to unsustainable
levels of a deeper downturn in the future. In an election year,
however, even a policymaker as officially independent as Mr Greenspan
is unlikely to inflict short-term pain for long-term gain. 

