Nanotechnology

Nanotechnology's unhappy father

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Eric Drexler invented nanotechnology. But what he thought he had
invented is not what has come to pass

IT IS a galling thing to see your invention stolen. That is not,
however, what Eric Drexler thinks has happened to him. Rather, and
rather worse, he believes the name of his invention has been stolen
and applied to something else. That name is nanotechnology, and Dr
Drexler is cross not merely about the theft, but the fact that he
feels the theft has stopped him pursuing his original vision. For the
term nanotechnology, which once had a precise, if far-off, meaning, is
now being bandied about by every Tom, Dick and Harriet with half a
plan for making very small things, and a need to get a government
grant or raise venture capital.

Miniaturisation is not, of course, a new idea. One of the consistent
aims of innovation has been to make things as small as
possible. Smallness saves space. It brings portability, the
possibility of cramming more components together in order to achieve
more sophisticated ends and, not least, a saving in materials used,
and thus in cost. It was Richard Feynman, one of the 20th century's
most famous and eclectic physicists, who first raised the idea that
miniaturisation might go all the way down to the molecular level, and
that devices with components made from defined and countable numbers
of atoms might be made. He did so in 1959, in a lecture entitle d. 




Robots, start your engines 
Drivers wanted 
Off with the pith helmets 
Beyond the digital divide 
Cows go wireless 
Return of the homebrew coder 
The car that screens your calls 
Pressing pause, nature's way 
Heart of glass 
Blogging goes to work 
Innovation Summit and Awards 
Digital cameras zoom in 
Building the energy internet 
The gentle rise of the machines 
DNA's detective story 
Fixing the drugs pipeline 
Why speed isn't everything 
Nanotechnology's unhappy father 
Energy and the environment 



Click to buy from Amazon.com :, by Eric Drexler (Amazon.co.uk).

, by Richard Feyman.




 
I don't know how to do this on a small scale in a practical way, but I
do know that computing machines are very large; they fill rooms. Why
can't we make them very small, make them of little wires, little
elementsngs to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the late
1970s, turning them into a PhD thesis and a book calle d, which was
published in 1986. His vision was of a revolution in manufacturing
technology. Instead of being constructed from the top down, by
moulding and machining big things into small ones, objects would be
built from the bottom up, from their constituent atoms. 

Crucially, this would not be done by the familiar processes of
chemistry. These involve reactions in solutions, or in which at least
one component is a liquid or a gas. Instead, Dr Drexler imagined a
world o fdevices that could enter cells and tweak them, for
example). They might be large (rocket motors, for example). But the
key point was that they would be actively built, rather than simply
coming together by the random processes of diffusion that govern
solution-phase chemistry.

A bold idea. But to sell an idea you need marketing. And Dr Drexler
managed to pull off a trick that most marketing managers would give
their eye teeth for. He coined a term that has entered the popular
consciousness. Molecular dimensions are measured in billionths of a
metre, known as nanometres. So he called his visio n.

One of the themes o f is the idea of novel replicatorslogist at Oxford
University, had of describing human culture in terms o f that
replicate by leaping from brain to brain. 

Nanotechnology, as Dr Drexler describes it, may or may not come to
pass. What is undeniable is that he has created a new replicator. The
term nanotechnology became one of the most successful memes of the
late 20th century. And it has also illustrated one of the other
properties of replicatorsin them is climbing on the bandwagon. Indeed
cynics, of whom there are many, doubt whether the term actually
describes anything at all, beyond a trend that would have happened
anyway to do ever more precise chemistry. 

 



 
Cynics have reason for their scepticism, for the one thing the term
nanotechnology undoubtedly does describe is big budgets. The
ponderously named 21st Century Nanotechnology Research and Development
Act, for example, was signed into law by President George Bush in
December. This act proposes adding $3.7 billion to the budget of the
American government's National Nanotechnology Initiative between 2005
and 2008.

Yet ecological shifts do not happen for no reason, either in biology
or in sociology. And although a lot of th e nanotechnology would
indeed have happened anyway, it is, nevertheless, actually
happeninghere are few commercial products yet, but some are clearly on
the horizon. Objects called carbon nanotubes, for example, are
employed in a new generation of display unit that combines the sharp
picture-generating method used in cathode-ray tubes with a screen as
flat as that of a liquid-crystal display. Nanotubes may also form the
basis of a new electrical conductor that would be as good at power
transmission as copper, but cheaper and one-sixth of the weight. Nor
is Feynman's vision of truly miniature computers
neglected. Molecule-sized transistors and other electronic components
have now been created, and researchers are trying to work out how to
fit them together . of controlled dimensions have even been used in
sunscreens. 

But nanotubes are grown from gases, using traditional catalysts. And
molecule-sized transistors and nano-sunscreens are also synthesised
without a molecular assembler in sight. Does it matter? In the grand
scheme of things, probably not. As Shakespeare said , If nanotubes,
molecular electronics and even sunscreens end up smelling sweetin a
novel calle d, and really put the cat among the pigeons.

There are all sorts of reasons why, even if Drexleresque machine-phase
nanotechnology did come to pass, grey goo is not a plausible
consequence. In any case, self-replicating assemblers will not come to
pass soon, if ever. But that has not stopped fear of grey goo, with a
little help from certain neo-Luddites, sticking in the public
imagination. Even the heir to the British throne has expressed concern
about nanotechnology, as a consequence of reading about grey goo. It
is not likely that the grey-goo meme will stop progress, but it
might. Opposition to agricultural biotechnology grew strong with
almost as little scientific foundation.

The other reason for concern is that the mutation of the
nanotechnology meme has drawn attentiond case that nanomachines would
work if they could be built, but was hazy on how to get to the point
where they might be. That, many mainstream chemists believe, is
because making them using molecular assemblers is impossible. 

Their objection was outlined by Richard Smalley, of Rice University in
Texas, in a recent exchange of letters with Dr Drexler in Chemical and
Engineering News. Dr Smalley, whose projects include work on nanotube
power-transmitters, says that considerations of geometry, the sizes of
atoms, and the space available to work in mean that assemblers could
never do the sorts of jobs that Dr Drexler assigns to them. Dr Drexler
denies this vehemently, and claims that Dr Smalley and his supporters
have misinterpreted the arguments.

For the moment, though, Dr Drexler seems to have suffered the fate of
prophets throughout the ageso explore the nanotech future. Whether he
has truly seen that future remains, as it were, to be seen. 



