Terror detainees 

In trouble with the law

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Has the British government's treatment of foreign terror suspects been
so much fairer than the Americans'?
AFP 
 
 
And out they go
 
AS FIVE of the nine British detainees in Guantanamo Bay prepared to
fly back home this week, David Blunkett, the home secretary, compared
their much-criticised treatment at the hands of their American jailers
with the way in which Britain has dealt with its own foreign terror
suspects . he told a meeting at Harvard Law School. He might not have
been quite so smug had he known about the damning judgment by an
English court of his handling of a terror suspect held in Belmarsh
high security prison for the past 16 months without charge or trial.

In a ruling delivered on the same day, a three-judge panel of the
Special Immigration Appeals Commission said that the evidence against
the 37-year-old Libyan, identified only a s, wa s, and ordered his
release. M is the only one of 14 foreign suspects being held in
Britain under the 2001 Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act to have
had his appeal against indefinite detention upheld. The Home Office is
appealing. 


Mr Blunkett had argued that M continued to pose a threat to Britain's
security. But the tribunal found that the evidence purportedly linking
M with al-Qaeda had been exaggerated, while some assertions made by
security-service witnesses wer e. 

The following day, there was public consternation when four of the
five Britons released from Guantanamo Bay were promptly arrested by
anti-terrorist police on their return to Britain British peopel. But
after nearly two days of questioning they were released without
charge. The fifth man had been freed within hours of his return.

From the outset, it looked unlikely that any of the returning men
would face trial. Prosecuting people for offences not committed on
British soil is difficult, and much of the evidence collected by
American interrogators would anyway have been inadmissible in English
courts. But the absence of any trial will make it harder for the men
to clear their names.

Lawyers for the freed men have demanded that America be made t o they
had suffered by being held for more than two years at Guantanamo
without charge or access to lawyers, courts or family. One of those
lawyers described his client's treatment in America a s. Another was
blunter, claiming it amounted t o. But it will be difficult to find a
court willing or able to examine the men's complaints. 

The European Court of Human Rights could not take on the case as
America does not come under its jurisdiction. Nor could the newly
established International Criminal Court, as the alleged offences were
not committed by, nor took place in, a party signed up to the court
(neither America nor Cuba are signatories). And the International
Court of Justice hears only disputes between states. Even an apology
is unlikely to be forthcoming.

Four Britons remain in Guantanamo. None has yet been charged, though
two are among the first six detainees designated for trial before a
special American military tribunal. An unnamed Bush administration
official claimed this week that the four Britons were too dangerous to
be released. All had been picked up in th e of Afghanistan and had
undergone terrorist training in al-Qaeda camps, he said.

Mr Blunkett promised this week to ensure that the four Britons got
a. But he also indicated for the first time that he expected them to
stand trial in the United States where, he said, the evidence against
them would b e. Until now, the British government has always insisted
that the British detainees should be repatriated unless they could be
given the internationally recognised minimum guarantees for a fair
trial. This they still have not got. 


