Argentina 

Reign of terror

Mar 11th 2004 | SANTIAGO DEL ESTERO 
From The Economist print edition


A grisly murder, and a challenge to a provincial fief
 
 
 

 
EVERY Friday evening for the past year, a swelling group of protesters
has marched the five miles from the town of La Banda to Santiago del
Estero, the sleepy capital of one of Argentina's most backward
provinces. Their immediate grievance was the murder of two women, and
the apparent involvement in the killings heard about the crime, and
was killed to stop her talking.


Inspired by the protests, the judge summoned up the courage to order
the arrest of Mr Azar, his wife and son, plus a provincial legislator,
several police officers and the judge who originally oversaw the
case. And Nistor Kirchner, Argentina's president, has sent his
human-rights secretary, Eduardo Luis Duhalde, to Santiago. He has
joined the marches, and has filed charges against Mr Azar for the
murder of 28 people wh o during Argentina's military dictatorship of
1976-83. Anger over the murders even threatens to topple Nina Juarez,
the provincial governor, and her husband Carlos, who have ruled the
place on and off since 1949. 

Even after democracy returned to Argentina, some things remained the
same in Santiago. A police raid last week revealed what many had long
suspected: that Mr Azar's security forces had illegally amassed files
on thousands of his opponents. According to the Catholic church's
human-rights office in the town, the police have killed 26 people in
the past five years . argues Cristina Torres, a justice-ministry
official, who says she was herself tortured by Mr Azar during the
military regime. 

Poverty is as endemic as are corruption and police brutality. Two out
of three people in Santiago are poor. Local and national government
employs 86% of the workforce; job insecurity has helped to keep
dissent in check. Even now, human-rights workers report multiple
complaints from people who have been sacked because they or one of
their relatives were spotted on the murder marches. Protesters have
received death threats and been followed and bugged. 

The likes of the Juarezes have been entrenched for decades in much of
northern Argentina. But Mr Duhalde's arrival seems to have marked a
watershed. Mr Juarez himself is now under scrutiny for disappearances
during the dictatorship. His wife is charged with defrauding the state
pension system and organising an attack on a rival
politician. Investigations have re-opened into the suspicious deaths
of two of their opponents. Federal officials muse about taking over
the administration of the province, or at least its justice system. 

The Juarez family has friends in Congress, in the ruling Peronist
party and in the docile provincial legislature. Ms Juarez has made her
husband a provincial minister, thus (she hopes) giving him
immunity. And this is not the first time Mr Juarez has been in
trouble: in 1993, the government intervened in Santiago after his
mansion was destroyed in a riot. Two years later, he was elected
again, and turned to Mr Azar to help him take his revenge. Perhaps
this time he will go for good. 


