France's far right 

Effrontery

Mar 11th 2004 | TOULON 
From The Economist print edition


A report from the National Front's southern heartland

Get article background

 hisses a woman piling fat, waxy lemons into her basket in the
 market . Will she vote National Front even though its leader is no
 longer standing in the regional elections later this month ? She is
 surprised at the news .

The politicians officially kicked off their frantic campaigning for
the elections, to France's 22 regions, this week. The mood in
Provence-Alpes-Ctte d'Azur (PACA) is more soberoverned in 1995-2001,
middle-aged women in twin-sets stuff envelopes and put posters in
boxes. The menace is not the Front's return, but its entrenchment. 

Will the last-minute barring of Mr Le Pen, on technical grounds, dent
the Front's vote? Both the centre-right and the Socialists are ahead
of the Front in the polls. Mr Le Pen's replacement, Guy Macary, has
none of the boss's charisma. Yet polls mask the Front's appeal. As a
voice of protest, it is a tough party to take on: there is always
something to protest against. And, although Mr Le Pen is best-known
for his anti-immigration views, the party's young guard, such as his
daughter, Marine, who is standing in the Paris region, promote a more
respectable populist nationalism. The Front's leaflets make less of
immigration than of other complaints, such as crime, taxes,
globalisation and corruption. 

This speaks forcefully to the shopkeepers, farmers, artisans, small
businessmen and jobless who form the Front's electoral
backbone. Unemployment in the south is above the average; much work is
unsteady and seasonal. Insecurity is the underlying impulse. The
Front's strength is not so much in towns that have lots of immigrants
as in those that fear they could end up that way. Pascal Perrineau, a
political scientist, calls this th e. The Front holds Orange, in
Provence, but not Marseilles, which has more immigrants. A local Front
official detects growing support inland, where people are fed up with
vandalism, crime and a sense that public cash goes only to the
Riviera. In some of them, he expects to win over 50%.

The Front may not seize the region, which could switch from Socialist
to centre-right control. But this would hardly count as a big
defeat. By forcing a three-way second-round run-off in the south, and
elsewhere, the Front will again reveal the disillusion with the
mainstream political class. In Toulon's Lafayette market, anti-elitism
falls on ready ears. A woman selling artichokes says bluntly :


