Venezuela 

Regime change or bust

Mar 11th 2004 | CARACAS 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

How does Venezuela's increasingly authoritarian president get away
with it?

Get article background

EVEN before the election of Hugo Chavez, Venezuela was in trouble. But
in the five years since he became president, Mr Chavez has steered his
country into the abyss. The economy is disintegrating; the opposition
is trying to oust him through a California-style recall referendum;
other leaders revile him. Yet Mr Chavez still looks safe in his
job. Why?

In part, because of some old-fashioned Latin American
strong-arming. The opposition groups allege that around a dozen people
have been killed in the last two weeks, during street protests at the
scuppering of their referendum campaign. Venezuela's electoral
commission, the CNE, controversially disqualified over 1m signatures
on the recall petition; its organisers will imminently decide whether
to try to get some of those names reinstatedshold required to trigger
a referendumh prices bring to the state oil corporation, PDVSA, should
go into a fund to compensate for the vicissitudes of the oil-price
cycle. But Mr Chavez has raided the fund, and now argues that such
revenues should pay for economic subsidies.

He has other sources of income, too. His bid to persuade the central
bank, the BCV, to hand over $1 billion of its reserves has been
channelled into social programmes of doubtful durability. These should
boost the vote for the president in the unlikely event of a recall
referendum, and for his candidates in the mayoral and gubernatorial
elections due in August. Parliamentary elections are due next
year. Despite its experience with the thwarted recall campaign, the
opposition is unlikely to boycott them altogether, thus lending the
votes a semblance of credibility. 



Oiling the revolution
These shenanigans, of course, have a price, and not just in
protesters' lives. On the black market, the bolmvar is
plummeting. Partly as a result, inflation is the highest in the
region: over 27% last year. Internal debt, which most Venezuelan banks
have little choice but to keep refinancing, has spiralled. So Mr
Chavez's economic populism is unsustainable; but if he manages to
crush the opposition, he won't have to sustain it. Then, Venezuela's
economy may come to look like look Cuba's . Mr Chavez once said ,

What can the rest of Latin America do about him? If (and probably
when) the opposition pulls out of the rigged referendum process, or is
finally defeated by the CNE's machinations, the verdict of
international observers will doubtless be harsh. The Organisation of
American States (OAS) may debate the imposition of sanctions. The
United States would like Brazil to take the lead in punishing Mr
Chavez; and Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, Brazil's president, is himself
increasingly disenchanted with his one-time ally. But even if Lula
obliges, the OAS is unlikely to agree on anything much.

Quite apart from the welfare of Venezuelans, George Bush's
administration has plenty of reasons for wanting to see the back of Mr
Chavez. He is implacably opposed to the Free-Trade Area of the
Americas, and to Plan Colombia, the campaign to defeat guerrillas and
drug-trafficking in Venezuela's neighbourerious instability in a
country that accounts for around 13% of American oil imports. This
week, he threatened to cut the oil supply to America altogether,
should Mr Bush try to dislodge him. 

Given his country's dependence on the dollars that the exports to
America bring in, the threat was a little outlandish (and Mr Chavez
later toned it down). But, equally, Mr Bush cannot himself afford to
ignore the danger of a fuel price hike, especially in an American
election year. With his hands on the oil pump, and the recall campaign
almost snuffed out, Mr Chavez looks set to hang on indefinitely. 


