Financial regulation 

The moral of Equitable

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


If something looks too good to be true, it generally is. That includes
regulation
PA 
 
 

 
THE collapse of Equitable Life, a mutually owned assurer set up in
1762, has offered lots of choice over whom to blame: managers, board
directors, regulators, the Labour government, the Tories. That is, in
part, because the origins of this affair go back a decade or more. It
is also, though, because life assurers are so complicated, a fact that
is born out by the 800-plus pages of the official report into the
affair published by Lord Penrose, a senior judge, this week (see
article). In the end, though, there is another reason, too: it is that
attempts to regulate financial companies, though designed to make
things clearer, can actually end up making them fuzzier.

The time-honoured way to make investors careful and managers dutiful
is for collapses to happen from time to time. When they do, investors
are reminded that the people best suited to monitor their money are
themselves and managers see that failures of duty, or outright crimes,
lead to dismissal, loss of reputation, or jail. What Equitable did, in
essence, was to offer guaranteed returns it could not fulfil and to
pay bonuses to policyholders that depended not on investment income
but on recruiting new investors. Its offers were too good to be true,
or at least to be sustained. Caveat emptor is thus the traditional,
and correct, reaction: let the buyer beware. 

Lord Penrose's report largely falls within that tradition, and the
government's reaction to it entirely so. Lord Penrose handed out blame
widely, but laid the largest part of it on Equitable's managers and
directors. He said that regulatory weaknesses were a secondary issue
was designed to encourage retail investors to feel that they could
trust regulated institutions and thus to put more of their savings in
those hands. It may well have encouraged policyholders to put their
money in the Equitable, or to leave it there despite doubts. For
regulation was, after all, being improved.

What Lord Penrose finds is that it wasn't, or not rapidly enough. And
he finds both that the system was poor and that officials did their
jobs complacently or feebly. In 1989 a young opposition MP called
Gordon Brown lobbied the then Tory government to compensate investors
in a failed firm, Barlow Clowes, after the Parliamentary Ombudsman
said regulators had bee n. That seems to have been true again. It does
not mean that today's chancellor should compensate investors for all,
or even most, of their losses. But it does mean that the government
ought to take some of the responsibility, perhaps by helping out the
hardest-hit investors. It ought only to do so if it acknowledges
mistakes and says what it plans to do to prevent them happening
again. Another tradition, though, is likelier to prevail: some
compensation will eventually be paid, but with no admission of
fault. That is what happened with Barlow Clowes.


