National security 

The blame game

Mar 25th 2004 | WASHINGTON, DC 
From The Economist print edition 
 

Was Iraq a distraction from the war against America's real enemies?
And could those enemies have been countered earlier?

GEORGE BUSH is running as a war president, a man willing to take the
hard decisions needed to defend America from existential threat. As
evidence, he claims he took the danger of global terrorism very
seriously even before the attacks of September 11th 2001, and that
since then he has prosecuted the war on terror with the utmost
possible vigour, including the decision to overthrow Saddam Hussein. 

Given the significance of his war leadership, a credible challenge to
either of his claims would be a matter of the utmost consequence. This
week, both came under fire from a variety of reputable sources in
Washington. Their criticism could resonate far beyond the Beltway
because Americans have consistently said that, on terrorism, they
trust Mr Bush more than they do John Kerry, his Democratic rival.

On Tuesday March 23rd, the commission set up by Congress to
investigate the al-Qaeda attacks released preliminary reports
criticising both the Bush and Clinton administrations for their
responses to repeated assaults by al-Qaeda on American targets in the
1990s. It argues that both governments focused too much on diplomatic
efforts (for example, to try to get Afghanistan to expel Osama bin
Laden) rather than military options. It claims intelligence reports to
Mr Bush had given warning of a potentially catastrophic terrorist
attack against American targets (warnings that were later acknowledged
in testimony by Colin Powell, the secretary of state, and Donald
Rumsfeld, the secretary of defence). And it added new details of four
opportunities to capture Mr bin Laden himself between December 1998
and July 1999, which it claimed the Clinton administration failed to
grasp for fear of killing innocent bystanders.

This was bad enough but, the day before, a new book by Richard Clarke(
, Free Press) levelled accusations that could prove even more
damaging. Mr Clarke, the counter-terrorism co-ordinator in both the
Bush and Clinton administrations, argues that Mr Clinton took the
threat of al-Qaeda somewhat more seriously than the Bush
administration (and even had successes against it, such as foiling a
plot to bomb Los Angeles airport and a hotel in Jordan during the
millennium celebrations and disrupting its attempt to take over Bosnia
during the Yugoslav wars). The Bush administration was weaker, Mr
Clarke claims, because members of the president's inner circle were
distracted by their obsession with Saddam Hussein. Before 9/11, they
thought the danger from al-Qaeda important; they did not think it
urgent.

Mr Clarke says he asked the new administration within a week of its
inauguration to discuss the threat from al-Qaeda at the highest
(cabinet) level. But such a meeting did not take place until nine
months laterful. In testimony before the commission on March 24th, Mr
Clarke dramatically apologised to the relatives of 9/11 victims
sitting in the room : And the charge that the Bush team was wrongly
focused on Iraq instead corroborates the growing view that the
president and his team are stubborn over matters of national security
(a view that stems partly from the administration's insistence that
weapons of mass destruction would be found in Iraq). John Kerry has
been repeating the charge of stubbornness at every chance he gets. 

The administration has responded to Mr Clarke's charges with a torrent
of personal censure, impugning his motives by accusing him of
everything from frustrated ambition to political disloyalty and to
bein g (Dick Cheney's term). Given Mr Clarke's backgroundbout Saddam
in early 2001, the administration had every cause to worry about Iraq
when it came into office. The real question is whether it could have
done more than it did against al-Qaeda, regardless of the reason.

Mr Clarke says it could. He argues that the administration could have
strengthened the Northern Alliance, the armed opposition group
fighting the Taliban for control of Afghanistan. It could also have
pushed harder to deploy Predator drone aircraft over Afghanistan to
kill Mr bin Laden before 9/11. It could have spent more money reducing
its vulnerabilities at home (in fact, the Justice Department did not
list fighting terrorism as one of its main goals before 9/11). It
could have done more to encourage, say, educational alternatives to
radical Islamism in Muslim countries threatened by al-Qaeda. 

The report by the 9/11 commission provided some corroboration for
these claims of negligence to act. So, this week, did internal
administration documents which showed that, after 9/11, the Office of
Management and Budget cut by two-thirds a request for $1.5 billion of
additional counter-terrorism funding from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.

In reply, Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, argued (in
an article published in the Washington Post, not coincidentally, on
the day Mr Clarke's book appeared) that the administration did in fact
increase funding for counter-terrorism before 9/11. It did consider
deploying armed Predators, but military experts said the craft were
not ready. It rejected sending help to the Northern Alliance on the
ground that the group was then too weak to make significant advances
anyway. As several of the officials giving testimony to the commission
argued, it would have been politically impossible to have sent
substantial commando forces into Afghanistan before 9/11: neither
surrounding countries nor the American Congress would have
countenanced such a move. 

Most important, Miss Rice argued, even if the administration had done
everything Mr Clarke wanted, that would probably not have been enough
to deal with al-Qaeda or stop the terrorist attacks on the World Trade
Centre. Mr Bush, she said, was tired o f. Something more was needed,
which the administration was working on throughout 2001. But it was
too late. 

And there, for the moment, the debate rests. The Bush administration
was urged to do more before 9/11, and chose not to, for reasons that
seemed right and reasonable at the time. It was working on a strategy
to deal with al-Qaeda, but too slowly to do any good. Some of its
members were more concerned about Saddam Hussein than Osama bin
Laden. Nothing here can be called indefensible. Whether this is the
record of someone who treated al-Qaeda with the utmost seriousness is
another matter. 
k