Malaysia's election 

Bravo Badawi

Mar 25th 2004 | KUALA LUMPUR 
From The Economist print edition


Dr Mahathir's old party has done better without him

Get article background

THE National Front coalition may have won every election since
Malaysia's independence, but it has not won by such a crushing margin
in decades. On March 21st, voters awarded it 90% of the seats in the
national parliament, up from 77% in 1999. It also won control of 11 of
the 12 state governments at stake, while its share of the popular vote
rose from 57% to 64%. Meanwhile, the biggest opposition party, the
Pan-Malaysia Islamic Party (PAS), retained only seven of the 27
national seats it held in 1999, was practically obliterated in one of
the two states it had controlled, and held on to the other by the
thinnest of margins. So were the voters endorsing the status quo, and
rejecting criticism of the government? Not exactly: the result was a
victory for the opposition's ideas, though not for its parties. 

 
 
 

 
Dumbfounded opposition leaders are denouncing the conduct of the
election and calling for a new one. They point to a study of the
electoral roll conducted before the poll which found a worryingly high
proportion of false or incomplete addresses, and untraceable or
suspicious names that voters from the country's Malay Muslim majority
spurned PAS's dogmatic vision of an Islamic state in favour of the
Front's more progressive approach. It is certainly true that Malay
voters deserted PAS in droves in Kelantan and Terengganu, the two
states it had won decisively in 1999. Many of them, especially women
and the young, doubtless chafed at PAS's edicts banning rock concerts,
encouraging modest dress, and separating the sexes in supermarkets and
on beaches. 

 
 
 

 
But the National Front, despite condemning PAS as reactionary zealots,
itself takes quite a doctrinaire approach to Islam, especially in
areas with lots of conservative Muslim voters. It matched PAS's call
for an Islamic state with a declaration that Malaysia already was
one. Just before the election, it tried to defuse PAS's campaign in
favour of private Islamic education with an announcement that Malay
students would have to study Arabic and the Koran in state
schools. One National Front state government even encourages
polygamy. A big selling point of Abdullah Badawi, the prime minister
and National Front leader, is his degree in Islamic studies. 

Mr Badawi was indeed an important factor in the election, but probably
as much for his unsullied and gentlemanly reputation as for his
Islamic credentials. He came to power only last October, upon the
retirement of Mahathir Mohamad, the prime minister of 22 years. At the
previous election, voters seem to have blamed Dr Mahathir both for the
struggling economy and for the high-handed and corrupt ways of
Malaysian officialdom. They also associated him with the unjust
treatment of Anwar Ibrahim, finance minister and deputy to Dr
Mahathir, who was sacked, jailed and beaten in 1998. By retiring
before this election, Dr Mahathir deprived his critics of their most
emotive issue. 

By contrast, Mr Badawi, o r as Malaysians affectionately call him, is
a breath of fresh air. In his five months in office, he has launched a
counter-corruption drive, called for an inquiry into the police force
and scrapped an extravagant construction scheme. In the election
campaign, too, he stole the opposition's thunder by promising humbler,
cleaner and more responsive government. 

PAS and Keadilan, a party founded by disgruntled supporters of Mr
Anwar, dismiss Mr Badawi's soft spot for good governance as a campaign
ploy. Dr Mahathir, too, they argue, sold himself as a reformer at
first. What is more, the senior echelons of the United Malays National
Organisation (UMNO), the main component of the National Front, are
still packed with the sort of politicians that the electorate turned
against in 1999. 

Before this election, Mr Badawi's supporters argued that he did not
yet have enough authority to overhaul UMNO or the government
wholesale. He had, after all, been appointed deputy prime minister by
Dr Mahathir and then inherited the premiership without an
election. His thumping victory at the polls, however, should put such
concerns to rest. So Mr Badawi's choice of ministers next week, and
his selection of office-holders within UMNO at the party's conference
in June, will provide the first unambiguous test of his sincerity as a
reformer. 

There is one item on the opposition's agenda, however, that Mr Badawi
seems likely to neglect. So far, he has barely mentioned, let alone
dismantled, the various repressive measures that Dr Mahathir employed
to dampen dissent. The government still controls the airwaves,
potential critics have difficulty obtaining newspaper licences,
opposition politicians are jailed without trial, protest rallies are
banned. As one activist points out, when the government's critics are
cowed, the corruption and inefficiency Mr Badawi says he is battling
are sure to thrive.


