Mercenaries 

The Baghdad boom

Mar 25th 2004 | BAGHDAD 
From The Economist print edition


AP 
 
 

 

British companies have been grousing about losing out to the Americans
in Iraq. But in one area, British companies excel: security

THE sight of a mob of Iraqi stone-throwers attacking the gates to the
Basra palace where the coalition has its southern headquarters is no
surprise. What's odd is the identity of the uniformed men holding them
off. The single Briton prodding his six Fijians to stand their ground
are not British army soldiers but employees of Global Risk Strategies,
a London-based security company.

Private military companies (PMCs)d. Their crew-cut occupants compare
personal automatics, restock the bars and refill the floodlit pools of
the former Baathist chiefs. 

Established companies have expanded; new ones have sprung up. Control
Risks, a consultancy, now provides armed escorts. It has 500 men
guarding British civil servants. Global Risk Strategies was a two-man
team until the invasion of Afghanistan. Now it has over 1,000 guards
in Iraqasl (Gurkhas and Fijians) an d (usually white
first-worlders). Iraqis get $150 a month , 10-20 times as much, an d
100 times as much. Control Risks still relies on westerners, but
ArmorGroup, a British rival, employs 700 Gurkhas to shepherd America's
primary contractors in Iraq, Bechtel and KBR. Erinys's corps of
pipeline protectors is overwhelmingly Iraqi. The cheapness of the
other ranks, compared with western soldiers, is one reason why PMCs
are flourishing . asks one.

Nobody knows how long government contracts will last after the CPA
dissolves on June 30th. But multi-billion World Bank and UN
reconstruction funds should provide rich pickings. Amid rising
violence, the Program Management Office, which handles America's $18.6
billion aid budget for Iraq, has raised its estimates of security
costs from an initial 7% of contracts to 10%. Blackwater, the American
firm protecting Iraq's American proconsul, Paul Bremer, says in many
cases costs run to over 25%. That's bad news for Iraqis hoping for
reconstruction, but great news for PMCs.

The boom has led to two worries. The first is lack of
regulation. Stressed and sometimes ill-trained mercenaries operate in
Iraq's mayhem with apparent impunity, erecting checkpoints without
authorisation, and claiming powers to detain and confiscate identity
cards. A South African company guarding a Baghdad hotel put guns to
the heads of this correspondent's guests. According to the CPA,
non-Iraqi private-security personnel contracted to the coalition or
its partners are not subject to Iraqi law. Even the industry is
concerned. Regulation is vital, says ArmorGroup's Christopher Beese,
if Iraq is not to descend into the law of the jungle. 

Second, the boom may be eroding Britain's defences. Just when the war
on terror is stretching the SAS to the limit, the rising profitability
of private sector work is tempting unprecedented numbers of its men to
leave. An SAS veteran estimates that some 40 of its 300 corps
requested early release from their contracts last year. Another
guesses that there are more ex-SAS people in Iraq than there are
currently serving in the regiment. Head-hunters poaching military
talent, say critics, risk turning the army's elite corps into little
more than a training school for PMCs. 

