Lessons of a genocide 

Rwanda, remembered

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Ten years after Rwanda's genocide, what has the world learned?
AFP 


IT WAS the purest genocide since 1945, and perhaps the single greatest
act of evil since Pol Pot turned Cambodia into a killing field. But
how many people can name any of the perpetrators of the Rwandan
genocide of 1994? The alleged mastermind, Colonel Thioneste Bagosora,
who is now on trial, is not exactly a household name. The world has
not forgotten Rwanda's tragedy, but it has not examined it in much
detail, either. And there are still lessons to be learned.

Outsiders often assume that the genocide sprang spontaneously from
primeval ethnic antagonism. On the contrary, it was planned over many
monthsis were their enemies. The opportunity came on April 6th 1994,
when Rwanda's Hutu president was assassinated. Mr Bagosora and his
co-conspirators seized control of one of the world's most
authoritarian states, the whole apparatus of which was then turned to
mass murder. 



Not primeval, just evil

The assumption that the genocide erupted amid chaos made it easier for
western policymakers at the time to shrug that little could be
done. They were wrong. The small gang of Hutus who organised the
genocide were rational men in pursuit of a rationalot to attack a
hotel where many prominent Tutsis had sought sanctuary, brought
immediate results. Sterner warnings might have had a calming effect. 

Failing that, western powers could have used force to end the
killing. Romeo Dallaire, the UN's soldier on the spot, said it would
have taken only 5,000 troops. Others think more would have been
needed, but most agree that a determined military intervention would
have saved many lives. And it could have been done. Instead, the UN
withdrew its tiny presence. No one even jammed the radio station that
urged on the killers with slogans such a s

Ten years on, some lessons have been learned. Rwanda's Tutsi-dominated
government, born of the rebel army that stopped the genocide, has
learned never to trust the UN, or any other foreign body, to protect
its people. Since Tutsis are a small minority, and since thousands of
armed ginocidaires still lurk in the rainforests of Congo, Rwanda's
giant neighbour, it is hardly surprising that they feel vulnerable. 

Though they would deny it, Rwanda's ruling party and its
tough-as-kevlar president, Paul Kagame, have concluded that the only
way to guarantee the survival of the Tutsis is to remain in power
indefinitely. In many respects, they rule well: Rwanda has seen a
remarkable recovery since 1994 (see article). But they tolerate no
serious domestic opposition, nor much in the way of free
speech. Rwanda today is a thinly-disguised autocracy, where
dissidents, who are usually accused of genocidal tendencies, live in
fear, or exile, or both. The regime is also a menace to its
neighbours. It was justified in invading Congo to disperse the
ginocidaires who were using the place as a base for attacks on Rwanda,
but it surely did not have to kill 200,000 people in the process. 

The rest of the world has learned different lessons from its failure
ten years ago. Then, the West's reluctance to get involved was largely
a consequence of America's shambolic intervention in Somalia the
previous year. Since then, the response to all remotely similar
emergencies has been guided by a desire not to allow a repeat of
Rwanda. Some of the results have been encouraging. NATO eventually
checked Serb aggression in the Balkans, though only after the 1995
Srebrenica massacre. British troops ended Sierra Leone's terrible
civil war. Last year, in Congo's Ituri region, UN peacekeepers found
themselves in a position with ominous echoes of Rwanda in April 1994:
outnumbered, lightly armed and unable to prevent horrific tribal
killings. Instead of cutting and running, Europe sent a French-led
force to restore order, with some success.

The genocide has also jolted the world into reconsidering how to
prosecute mass killers. Ad hoc international tribunals for Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia, though slow and costly, are gradually securing
convictions. Several countries have passed laws allowing their courts
to try those accused of genocide, regardless of where the crime was
committed. The impetus to set up an International Criminal Court
sprang partly from the world's shame over Rwanda. Legally, genocide is
oddly definedearly two weeks after it began, by which time nearly half
the victims were dead. The grimmest lesson from 1994 is that men are
capable of evil most people would conside r, had they not seen the
rows of punctured skulls.
