Morocco and al-Qaeda 

After Madrid

Mar 25th 2004 | RABAT 
From The Economist print edition


The hunt continues

SIX Moroccans have so far been charged in Spain in connection with the
Madrid bombings, along with two Indians and a Spaniard. But Moroccan
and Spanish investigators have not yet found a clear link between that
outrage and the suicide-bombings that killed 45 people (including 12
bombers) in Casablanca, Morocco's largest city, last May. 

What investigators have found, apart from a certain similarity between
the two operations (both involved several simultaneous explosions),
are some personal contacts between suspects in the two countries. They
have also discovered that Jamal Zougam, one of the main suspects in
the Madrid bombings, visited Morocco a few weeks before the Casablanca
explosions. Although the Casablanca bombers were relatively
amateurish, Moroccan investigators believe they were organised, or at
least encouraged, by the same Spain-based al-Qaeda cell thought to
have carried out the Madrid bombings.

Morocco used to be an easy place for terrorists to operate in. Before
security started to tighten in 2002, supporters of Osama bin Laden
could move around and recruit without much hindrance in certain poor
suburbs of Tangiers and other Moroccan cities. Their Afghan-style
dress raised few eyebrows. In northern Morocco, as in neighbouring
Algeria, the skilled forgers who keep economic migrants supplied with
fake travel documents may unwittingly have helped terrorists on their
way. 

Moroccan investigators suspect that two Tangiers-born brothers,
Salaheddine and Abdelaziz Benyaich, acted as a bridge between al-Qaeda
operatives in Spain and the movement's admirers in Morocco. Both were
among the 35 suspected militants indicted by a Spanish judge, Baltasar
Garzon, last September. After the Casablanca bombings, Salaheddine, a
veteran of the Afghan and Chechen jihads, was picked up by the
Moroccan authorities and sentenced to 18 years in prison. Abdelaziz is
in a Spanish jail .

Another outfit under scrutiny is the Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group,
which began as a gathering of Moroccan volunteers who had fought or
trained in Afghanistan in the late 1990s. Mohammed al-Gerbouzi, widely
reported to have been one of its organisers, has lived in Britain for
years, but the British government is reluctant to extradite him,
despite urgent Moroccan requests.



