Taiwan 

The strait widens

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Taiwan's voters send a signal to China
Getty Images 
 
 

 
THERE is plenty that remains uncertain about last weekend's
presidential election in Taiwan, including the result. As The
Economist went to press, a debate was raging over whether to hold a
recount. Unusually, it was the incumbent president, Chen Shui-bian,
who was pushing for one, even though the declared result of the
election on March 20th had him ahead by about 30,000 votes, a slim
0.2% of the 13m valid votes cast. The opposition Kuomintang (KMT) were
suddenly stallingconomic growth has been fitful, policymaking
haphazard and relations between the presidency and parliament
(dominated by the KMT) appalling. Yet he has seen his vote rise from
39% in 2000 to 50%, give or take.


The most logical explanation for this is Mr Chen's devotion to the
eventual goal of Taiwanese independence, since this is what most
clearly distinguishes him from his KMT rival, Lien Chan. But what
might appear to a dispassionate observer as a reasonable aspiration is
deeply controversial. China has repeatedly vowed to use force to
prevent Taiwan actually declaring its independence, and to underline
the point has amassed an arsenal of at least 500 missiles on its
Taiwan-facing coast. Though he has often been branded as a dangerous
maverick, Mr Chen has in reality been quite clever. Time and again, he
has stepped up to China's red lines, before stepping slightly back
again. Each time, the cause of Taiwanese independence is left
marginally advanced. It is the politics of calibration, sometimes
clumsy, sometimes deft, but proceeding always in the same direction.

The two referendumsokes China, he naturally causes consternation in
America, which would far rather not be put to the test. It should be
remembered, however, that Mr Chen is talking only about the
possibility of a peaceful and democratic act of self-determination. It
is China that threatens resort to force.



An island divided
Still, while showing that the independence movement cannot simply be
brushed aside, events in Taiwan also show that opinion on the island
is polarised. Many of those who voted for Mr Lien do indeed regard Mr
Chen as extremely dangerous political paralysis would send a
lamentable signal to would-be democrats elsewhere. 

