Germany's gloom 

That malaise thing

Mar 25th 2004 | BERLIN 
From The Economist print edition


German voters (and politicians) are depressed about the future

IS GERMANY turning into a failed nation? Followers of the media might
wonder. Newspapers keep up a steady drum-beat about th e, the title of
a new book. The author, Gabor Steingart, does not want it to be
another piece of self-hatred, but he argues that Germany's history
since 1945 has been a big mistake, and that the country needs to be
refounded. Its famed industry? Running out of steam. Innovation? Look
elsewhere. Work ethic? On holiday. The welfare state? Bankrupt. The
elites? Don't ask.

Reuters 
 
 
Schrvder in Angstland
 
This mood of self-criticism is in serious danger of turning into
self-flagellation. Political leaders are worried. Despondency has
become a big theme in the campaign for the federal presidency. On
March 25th Gerhard Schrvder, Germany's embattled chancellor, made a
statement to parliament that was to mark the first anniversary of his
Agenda 2010 reform proposals, but was above all a call for more
optimism. 

Germans have never been cheeryf Germans said the next generation will
be poorer than they are, compared with 48% of all west Europeans and
31% of North Americans. 

A part of the malaise is, however, the fault of politicians, who have
not sold the case for reforms well. Mr Schrvder won the 2002 election
on such issues as opposition to the war in Iraq and the floods in
eastern Germanyput together a coherent programme. As many as 80% of
voters do not think the opposition would do a better job than the
government.

The media do not help voters to grasp that in crisis is
opportunity. Since the capital moved from Bonn to Berlin, a cosy
cartel has been replaced by cut-throat competition, with more outlets,
and plenty of big losses (which hardly make for positive
thinking). News cycles are getting shorter, with trivia leaping into
the headlines and any policy ideas swiftly shredded. Politicians
complain tha t makes it hard to discuss complex structural
reforms. And the press has developed a populist streak: what was long
the province of Bild, the leading tabloid, can now be found in more
highbrow publications, such as Stern and even Der Spiegel. Several
papers have adopted Bild's habit of calling for far-reaching reforms
but criticising specific ones as socially unbalanced. 

The gloom might be helpful if it led to a jolt that shook up the
country. But it could also tip into paralysis, as it did in Japan. And
it is unlikely to change Germans' contradictory attitude to reform:
they accept the need for change, but scream blue murder when they have
to pay to see their doctor. Self-pity can also be an obstacle to the
economy. If foreign investors are shunning Germany, that is partly a
result of Germans bashing their own country.

Even in Angstland, however, hope springs eternal. The media are
starting to realise that they may be part of the problem. Franz
M|ntefering, who has taken over from Mr Schrvder as leader of the
Social Democrats, has the right personality to persuade voters that,
despite the pain of reforms, they need not fear the future. Germans
will otherwise continue, as Johannes Rau, the outgoing federal
president, puts it, to "walk around looking as if they have too much
gastric acid."