Paying for the old 

Work, work, work

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Time to panic
AP 
 
 

 
OLD age, said Maurice Chevalier, the dapper French crooner , For most
of the elderly in rich countries, it is better than ever before. The
triumph of the welfare state on both sides of the Atlantic is that the
old are now no poorer than the young. Indeed in some countries, such
as Germany, old people are typically better off, counting the value of
all they receive from government, than the young. The result has been
a flourishing of retirement, that wonderful time of leisure and
freedom from toil (see article).

Alas, these golden years come at an unaffordable price. The large
generation of the baby-boomers soon starts to retire. They have
promised themselves generous pensions and health care. Moreover, they
leave the workforce much earlier than people did in the pasts that the
workforce in many countries will soon start to shrink. In America,
there are just enough babies for zero population growth. Elsewhere,
birth rates are even lower. So the ratio of workers to idle elderly
will grow worse and worse. The result will be a crisis for
governments, which face huge increases in their spending on social
security and health care. In the few countries where companies pay
pensions and the even fewer where they pay health costs, balance
sheets will come under immense pressure. No wonder the (fairly)
youthful Rick Wagoner, boss of General Motors, sees health-care costs
as the greatest single burden on his business.

What is the answer? Most governments more needs to be done, and in the
teeth of deep hostility from older voters and from the unions that
frequently defend their interests. Reform will be one of the toughest
tests of universal suffrage: children can't vote, young people don't
vote, but older people have a huge incentive to vote selfishly, and to
turf out governments that threaten their pensions and health care. 

The highest priority is to persuade older workers to stay a few more
years in employment. In work, they pay taxes and generate wealth. In
retirement, they pay much less tax, and rarely contribute to the
economy. Employers need them, too: many will lose more workers than
they can easily replace. In the aerospace industry, for example, some
27% of workers are likely to retire by 2008; and at the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, 22% of workers are already over
55 years old.

To persuade older workers to stay requires changes in pension schemes
and employment practices. Research by two American economists,
Jonathan Gruber and David Wise, has established that two factors are
crucial: the age at which social-security benefits first become
available, and the way benefits accrue if an older person continues to
work. If it does not pay to stay on at work, people do not do so: the
enticements of retirement are too great. 

At present, many employers are relieved when the old retire: seniority
pay systems and defined-benefit pension schemes make them much more
expensive to employ than younger workers even ifsent, hardly anyone
works past 65. Yet half of America's baby-boomers will live to the age
of 85 at least. Why not scrap all taxes on the income employees earn
after their 65th birthday? Set a tax-free income ceiling by all means
to stop elderly company directors from raking in millions. But treat
the average white-haired worker like a legal illegal