Save, save, save

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


You may live longer than you expect

IF GOVERNMENTS no longer guarantee to replace the bulk of earned
income in old age, individuals will have to do so themselves. Already,
saving for retirement is being transformed. In America, the country
that has travelled farthest down this road, private savings in
retirement accounts are set to become a more important source of
income in old age than Social Security. Other countries will
eventually head in roughly the same direction. 

People will have to become better at guessing how much they need in
retirement. They seem to have a good idea how long, on average, they
can expect to live. But for the individual, life expectancy can play
tricks. A 65-year-old man in America has an average life expectancy of
16 years, points out Olivia Mitchell of the Wharton School, but an 18%
chance of living to 90 or beyond. A 65-year-old woman has almost 20
years of life expectancy, but a 31% chance of living to be 90 or
older.


Guessing when the grim reaper will arrive is tricky; guessing how much
money one will need in old age is just as tough. In both America and
Germany, consumption tends to dip sharply after people retire. That
may mean people find they need to spend less. But it may also show
that they underestimate what they need. Some evidence for that comes
from a survey by the Prudential, a giant British insurer, which asked
a sample of people how much they thought they would need to live on in
retirement. The average was #18,000 ($32,500) a year. But half the
respondents had no idea what level of savings would deliver such a
sum. The other half guessed on average that savings of #115,000 would
generate that amount; in fact, the true figure is far higher. 

Getting people to save for retirement voluntarily is difficult. More
and more countries will create schemes similar to the 401(k),
America's tax-sheltered savings plan that many companies offer their
employees. In doing so, they need to learn some lessons from America's
experience.

By the late 1990s, about 85% of private pension-plan contributions
went into 401(k) and similar plans. Of those American workers with a
private plan (about half the workforce), 58% had nothing else. But do
such plans offer adequate protection? A new book by Alicia Munnell of
Boston College( ) argues that they don't.

 she says. First, 26% of eligible participants fail to join a
 401(k). Second, fewer than 10% of participants contribute the
 maximum. Most invest badly: more than half either put nearly all
 their savings into equities, or none. Hardly any of them rebalance
 their portfolios to reduce risk as they age. A scary 17% of all such
 plans are invested solely in the shares of the saver's employer, thus
 doubling the risk if the company fails. And 25% of workers who move
 jobs do not reinvest the cash from their 401(k) in another plan at
 their new employer. Lastly, on retirement, few workers invest any of
 their 401(k) pay-out in an annuity to guard against the costs of
 living longer than they expect.

It may be that Ms Munnell's view is too bleak. A series of important
studies of 401(k) plans by James Poterba of MIT and a group of fellow
economists suggests that such plans have been a staggering
success. They find that employees save roughly twice as much with
401(k)s as with traditional defined-benefit schemes. This is partly
because it is easier for employees to see what they have built up with
a 401(k). But employees who depend on a 401(k) are also likely to work
longer, and so to accumulate more assets before they
retire. Remarkably, most of the savings seem to be new money, not
money diverted from other savings schemes. 

Overall, Mr Poterba and his colleagues estimate that the average
household reaching retirement in 2025 will have as much wealth accrued
in 401(k) plans as in Social Security benefitsprivate scheme, which
has so far been a flop. A danger with compulsory schemes is that
workers may run down other, voluntary savings. And when there is a
generous state safety-net, poorer workers will often choose to spend
now rather than to save. 

An alternative is to give savers less choice in more sophisticated
ways. David Laibson, professor of economics at Harvard University, and
various colleagues conducted three experiments, which suggested that
the way workers respond depends on how the savings choice is
presented. When one scheme left it to the workers to choose whether or
not to enrol in a 401(k), more than 90% did not; when they had to make
an explicit choice to refuse to enrol, that figure fell to only 30%.

A second experiment found that, if workers were advised to save more,
they often said that they could not afford to do soe even when the pay
rise was merely to compensate for inflation, and saving more thus cut
real spending power. 

Mr Laibson's third study found that, if new employees at a firm were
given no deadline for joining a 401(k) scheme, only one-third of them
eventually enrolled, but with a deadline two-thirds did. Mr Laibson
would like to see 401(k)s redesigned to reflect these discoveries. He
also suggests extending the principle to set a ceiling on the share
held in a company's own stock, unless an employee asked otherwise. 



You can't take it with you
Such changes would encourage people to save more without compelling
them to do so. But what happens when people reach retirement? How
should they decide on their rate of spending? 

Happily, the insurance industry long ago created a product that should
solve the problem: the annuity. Pay a lump sum, and the insurer
guarantees you an income to the end of your days. However, people are
extraordinarily resistant to the notion of buying an annuity. Ron
Gebhardtsbauer, of the American Academy of Actuaries, speaks from
personal experience: he found it hard to persuade his elderly parents
to put even part of their retirement savings into one.

Why should that be? His parents wanted to leave something to their
children, but some annuities allow for that. Financial advisers tend
to urge older people to invest directly, rather than with an insurance
company, because the commission is juicier. Above all, he thinks, the
sum needed to buy an annuity seems intimidatingly large to an old
person. Wharton's Ms Mitchell, who has studied the resistance to
buying annuities on both sides of the Atlantic, argues that in Europe,
generous social security may be a further deterrent. And perhaps the
searing experience of inflation in the 1970s, when savings were wiped
out, is remembered vividly enough to put off today's old.

As public provision wanes, the demand for annuities may rise. So, too,
may interest in annuitising the value of the principal asset of most
old people, at least in America, Britain and Australia: the family
home. For years, insurance companies have tried in vain to popularise
schemes to allow the old to secure a lifetime's income flow from their
home. Now there is new interest. Britain's Prudential is launching a
scheme, and the main financial regulatory body is considering whether
to regulate reverse mortgages. 

But the retired will still be cautious. Some may even prefer to rent
out part of the house and secure an income stream in that
old-fashioned way, rather than to risk handing over this emotionally
charged asset to others, and forgoing the chance to bequeath it to
their children. 

