Iraq 

The joys and irritations of indirect rule

Apr 1st 2004 | BAGHDAD 
From The Economist print edition


After the Americans hand over at the end of June, they will continue
to call many of the shots

IN THE ten months since Saddam Hussein fell, Iraq's health ministry
had been a paragon of Christian-Muslim harmony. The Pentagon appointed
Jim Haveman, then director of an American missionary group, as a
special adviser in the ministry. Behind the scenes he pulled
strings. The minister, Khudair Abbas, a leading figure in the Dawa
party, which aspires to a Shia Islamic state, seemed happy . he
insisted. 

AFP 
 
 
Foul fellows of Fallujah
 
Now the tables have turned. This week, America's proconsul in Iraq,
Paul Bremer, gave the health ministry its independence. After a short
speech, he walked out of the building, possibly for the last time,
beneath a black banner proclaiming the inauguration o f, this one
after the Shias' favourite saint. A foretaste of things to come when
the Americans hand over power, as they have promised, on June 30th?
Shia triumphalists seem to be flexing their muscles. At the gates to
Mustansiriya University, hitherto the capital's most emancipated, they
now bar entrance to girls and female lecturers wearin g trousers or
tank-tops. 

But while Mr Bremer says the health ministry is readiest to be handed
over, others think it a poisoned chalice. Mr Abbas has five telephones
on his desk but none can call outside the ministry. With no landline
access to hospitals, the centralised distribution of medicines is
faltering, and drugs are in short supply. Mr Abbas says emergency
stocks worth $15m are on the way, but, despite the corruption that
undermined the UN's oil-for-food programme under the old dictatorship,
Iraq did get medicine worth some $250m a year. If there are epidemics
this summer, Mr Abbas, not Mr Bremer, will be blamed. 

But in other ways the Americans are seeking to cement their presence
beyond the June 30th deadline. In recent weeks, Mr Bremer has begun
appointing a host of Iraqis to new posts whose tenure will last into
the planned 18-month transitional period and beyond. He slipped  a
agreement into th e, as the interim constitution is known. So Iraq's
security forces will go on obeying a multinational force, led by the
Americans, throughout the transition. An American-appointed security
adviser, due to serve for five years, will oversee Iraq's security. 

Mr Bremer is also nominating a bevy of general inspectors, one for
each ministry, to sniff out corruption. And he has set up a host of
unelected bodies, whose members he will appoint for up to four years,
to oversee various affairs of state. A media and telecoms commission,
expected to regulate the airwaves, will erode the telecoms minister's
power . he complains. 

Less than 90 days before the formal American handover, Mr Bremer is
growing impatient. Most of his decisions make sense but some leave a
bad taste in the mouths of the many Iraqis who want to run the show
themselves. Members of Iraq's 25-strong Governing Council, appointed
by the Americans after the invasion, fear they are being reduced to
mere advisers. Some threaten to scrap Mr Bremer's edicts as soon as he
goes. 

But their irritation is nothing compared to that of the country's
leading Shia authority, Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistani. After ordering
his immense following into the streets, he thought he had persuaded Mr
Bremer to agree that a constitutional assembly would be directly
elected. But the interim constitution Mr Bremer signed with members of
the council is full of caveats favouring the coalition. An aggrieved
Mr Sistani has coated the country in posters denouncing the
transitional law as illegitimate. 

Members of the council are gloomy too. A national conference is meant
to be called soon to choose a provisional government. The infighting
among Iraqis is worsening. Even before he arrives, some council
figures are denigrating Lakhdar Brahimi, the UN's special envoy
charged with helping them and the Americans to choose an acceptable
leadership. Recently the insurgents issued a fatwa condemning all
members of the council to death. 

Meanwhile the violence continues. This week, five American soldiers
were killed by a bomb near Fallujah, a hotbed of Sunni insurgency west
of Baghdad. In the town itself, four American contractors were killed
when their cars were attacked. Their bodies were then burned,
mutilated and publicly abused, and two of them hung from a bridge; at
least one was dragged through the town behind a car. Such viciousness,
and the television reportage of it, raised concern about  a, harking
back to 1993, when the killing of 18 American soldiers and pictures of
some of their bodies being dragged through the streets prompted an
American retreat. The American administration, this time, immediately
ruled out any such weak-kneed reaction.

Will the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) simply disappear? Not
exactly. Some parts of its vast Baghdad compound will mutate into
foreign embassies or consulates. Other branches may just change
acronyms. For instance, the Project Management Office, a Pentagon
outfit charged with disbursing some of the $18.6 billion of American
cash earmarked for reconstruction and security, may keep premises to
monitor contracts' implementation. In short, the new system in Iraq
will be a mixture of Iraqi rule and indirect American rule. As a
senior CPA person puts it, the hope is that indirect rule proves more
positive than direct. 

