Searching for John Kerry's economic policy 

Is there a there, there?

Apr 1st 2004 | WASHINGTON,DC 
From The Economist print edition


AP 
 
 

In his opening efforts at developing an economic policy, John Kerry is
all fiddle and not much thrust


THE partisan eruptions over the testimony given by Richard Clarke
before the commission investigating September 11th may have given the
impression that the presidential contest is going to be fought chiefly
over foreign-policy matters, particularly George Bush's record in Iraq
and on the war on terror. Yet this week, the ground shifted quietly
back to the domestic issues of jobs, taxes and the economy that may,
in the end, prove to be what the election will actually be all about.

On April 2nd, the latest employment report is due out. Recent monthly
reports have recounted a truly dismal pace of job creation for so
robust an economic recovery, and opinion polls affirm that this is by
far President Bush's weakest point. In the days leading up to the
report, Mr Bush defended his economic record, and his tax cuts in
particular, while he and his lieutenants attacked th e record of
Senator John Kerry, the presumptive Democratic candidate.



John Kerry's tax plan 
Apr 1st 2004



United States



America's economy 

US Election 2004 



John Kerry announces his plans for the economy.




 
On March 26th, Mr Kerry delivered what he hoped would be seen as the
most definitive economic speech of his candidacy thus far, the chief
part of which is  a to create 10m jobs during his first term. A few
days later, he moved on to energy policy. More utterances on the
economy are expected over the next few weeks. How is Mr Kerry's
vision, such as it is, stacking up?

The symbolism of his jobs speech was not hard to miss. For his venue,
Mr Kerry chose Detroit, where Bill Clinton, 12 years earlier,
memorably steered the Democratic Party away from its disastrous old
obsessions with class and redistribution, and laid out a creed that
became known a s: a mix of fiscal discipline, a limited but responsive
government, and an economic populism that stressed jobs and growth
over class war. 

Mr Clinton's chief speechwriter in 1992, David Kusnet, now at the
Economic Policy Institute in Washington, DC, points to the parallels
in the way Mr Kerry has laid out his goods. Where Mr Clinton promised
t o, Mr Kerry promises t o. Both men remember Franklin Roosevelt's
call fo r on the part of government. And Mr Kerry, like Mr Clinton
before him, pointedly seeks the centre groundpts to narrow the tax
debate with Republicans down to the least publicly defensible of Mr
Bush's tax cuts: those on inheritance, dividends and capital gains
that benefit the filthy rich.

The politics of the proposals certainly seem canny. For Mr Kerry
addresses full-square the widespread perception, albeit a false one,
that jobs outsourced overseas are at the root of America' s. His
answer is to end the preferential tax treatment of overseas earnings
that at the margin encourages American companies to base production
overseas rather than at home. And with the money thus saved, he will
be able to cut the corporate-tax rate on the great bulk of American
companies, from 35% to 33.25%. Cutting company taxes: not even Mr Bush
has dared do that. Mr Kerry has stolen some Republican ground.



An accountant's dream
America's corporate tax system is certainly ripe for
attention. America not only taxes its companies at a relatively high
rate, it also, unlike other countries, taxes them on their worldwide
operations. This puts American firms at a disadvantage overseas
compared with lower-taxed competitors. So in order to help them,
Congress over the years has legislated to allow American companies to
put off paying taxes on overseas profits until these are actually
brought home. Thus, a big pool of moneygan, Pennsylvania and Ohio,
that have been losing jobs. But is it really clever for the economy as
a whole?

This newspaper has advocated getting rid of corporate taxation
altogether (on the grounds that it is easy to evade, inefficient and
bad for growthhe end Mr Kerry is simply tinkering with an already
fiendishly complex tax code. His utterances this week on high oil prices