Venture capital 

After the drought

Apr 1st 2004 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

After three difficult years, money is again flowing to the
venture-capital industry. Can it curb its exuberance this time?

IT SEEMS like only yesterday that start-up companies, preferably doing
something internet-related, and the sleek-suited venture capitalists
who funded them, were all the rage. They could scarcely be less trendy
now. Since the dotcom craze collapsed, many of the firms born during
the boom years have died, or else stagger on as shadows of their
former selves. Martin Pichinson, an insolvency specialist who has
built a reputation as th e of America's Silicon Valley, recently said
that around 7,000 companies are still waiting for the receivers to
arrive. Not surprisingly, the money available for investments in
start-up companies slowed to a trickle after the bubble burst.

For venture capitalists everywhere, the result has been painful. They
make their money by investing in start-ups and very young companies
and then selling these investments on, either to other firms through
so-calle d or to other investors through a stockmarket flotation. When
opportunities for start-ups, and the appetite to invest in them, both
fell abruptly, the businesses of venture capitalists shrivelled. One
example is Britain's 3i, one of Europe's biggest venture firms. Its
boss, Brian Larcombe, said last month he will leave in July, just as
the company announced that it had finally reversed the nasty losses of
the past few years. Many other firms disappeared altogether.

The downturn has been more intensely felt because the venture-capital
(VC) industry enjoyed an extraordinary period of easy money during the
bubble. In 1999, the last full year of VC bullishness, buoyant
stockmarkets made it absurdly easy to float companies, the most
lucrative exit route for early-stage investors. For 1999 annual VC
returns, comprising realised profits and the rise in the value of
retained holdings, reached an unsustainable 146%. By contrast, in the
year to September 2003 the average American VC firm showed  a of minus
17.8%.

Now, however, there are signs of revival. In the fourth quarter of
last year start-ups in Silicon Valley received $1.6 billion of VC
money, $300m more than in the third quarter, according to VentureOne,
a research company. Perhaps more importantly, for the first time in a
while venture capitalists say they are spending more time looking at
new business plans than nursing their ailing start-ups. In Europe, VC
firms say write-offs of troubled technology investments fell by half
in 2003 from the year before. Start-ups are still going bust, but more
are surviving.

That is reassuring investors, for whom the allure of venture capital
is the good long-term returns that should come from betting on a
portfolio of young, mostly technology-related, companies. Over the
past 20 years, even including the recent downturn, VC investments have
yielded an average 15.7% per year, according to Thomson Venture
Economics. That is higher than the returns from most other
investments. It also looks particularly attractive today, when
valuations of both shares and bonds are stretched and when other
so-called alternative investments are looking dodgy. Hedge funds, for
instance, have been flooded with new money, and returns are bound to
suffer.

If only venture capital can avoid the excesses of the late 1990s, it
could be one of the last few sources of above-average returns. In
fact, a new boom is the last thing the industry wants, for fear of an
inevitable bust. But can it avoid one? The investment climate looks
more favourable than at any time in the past four years. One factor is
the improved mood of investorsl $135 billion (some of which has yet to
be investedireless communication. It raised $165m last month,
handsomely rewarding the venture capitalists who invested in the
company in late 2001, in the depths of the VC depression.

Two upcoming flotations in America are likely to cause even more
joy. Google, an internet search engine that was funded with $25m from
Sequoia Capital, and Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, two of
California's most venerable VC names, is expected to float in the
coming months. Some analysts reckon the company will sport a market
value of up to $15 billion. Even before Google goes public, the IPO of
salesforce.com might bring a smile to venture capitalists. Its has
healthy annual revenues and turns a profit on the
customer-relationship-management software it sells. If these offerings
fulfil expectations and markets remain steady, then more VC-led
offerings should follow.

Venture capitalists have typically concentrated their investing in two
broad areas: technology and health care. During the enthusiasm of the
bubble years, the ter m was stretched to include any dotcom, even if
it aimed to sell pet-food or to deliver groceries in a white
van. Today VC firms have mostly returned to genuine technology
ventures, and notably to companies developing software applications
for corporate customers. That has coincided with a rebound in company
spending on IT projects.

One computing area that has continued to attract VC investments is
open-source softwareftware companies a fee for the privilege of using
their programs. Instead they charge customers for service and support
functions. Red Hat, one of the firms in his portfolio, has done this
so successfully that it leads its market and is nicely profitablets
that the sector risks being saturated wit h companies, in the same way
that hundreds of online retailers sprang up in 1999. Similarly, a
growing number of start-ups' names are sporting the wor d, bidding to
exploit the rush of interest in nanotechnology.

For an even more troubling echo of the boom years, look at the growing
ranks of VC-funded start-ups devoted to something calle d. This refers
mostly to websites that cater to people who share the same interests
and want to meet and chat online. In so far as there is  a VC sector,
this is it. Friendster.com runs perhaps the best known such
website. Last October it received a $13m joint investment from Kleiner
Perkins Caufield & Byers and Benchmark Capital. LinkedIn, another
social-networking start-up, received around $5m from Sequoia last
November. Another half doze n start-ups have been funded or are in the
works. 

Although the money being handed out is nowhere close to that given to
dotcoms during the boom, it should worry investors that even the most
experienced venture capitalists are showing such herd-like instincts
today. Profits from social-networking firms may prove to be elusive as
those from most online-retailing ventures. Venture capitalists are
hoping, however, that the few winners will win so conclusively that
their eventual value will justify several initial investments.

Besides, say leading VC firms in their own defence, standards are much
more exacting today than they were a few years ago. Venture
capitalists are reluctant to fritter money away, so have become
stingier. The average technology deal nowadays on either side of the
Atlantic is about one-fifth of the size of deals done at the peak. In
addition, entrepreneurs are called far more closely to account.

Mr Harvey of Benchmark Capital says that the bust years have helped
weed out the entrepreneurs who were merely greedy, rather than
passionate, about building a company : Nearly all
information-technology new-business plans include some element of
offshoring, notes Peter Wagner, a partner at Accel Partners. Doing
software-development work in India seems like a perfect fit when
start-ups are receiving smaller amounts of money at wider
intervals. It is especially sensible in Silicon Valley, where housing
costs alone mean that even mediocre software engineers are several
times more expensive than their equivalents in Bangalore. Some
start-ups can exist in the more sober funding climate only thanks to
cheap foreign programmers.



Healthy scepticism
While technology investing is becoming fashionable again, VCs never
lost their fondness for health-care start-ups. The lure of
biotechnology and drug development has always proved irresistible,
even though returns, so far, have been disappointing. But as the drug
industry has changed, so too has the way VC firms invest. Increasingly
they have to compete not just with each other but with new entrantsce
specialised in only the biggest buy-out deals, but which are now
willing to invest in start-ups as well.

Take Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR), which achieved fame with its
mammoth leveraged buy-out of RJR Nabisco, a food conglomerate, in the
1980s. Earlier last month, KKR made its first biotech investment in an
American company called Jazz Pharmaceuticals, which develops drugs for
psychiatric diseases. That represents a big departure from its
traditional strategy of investing in more mature firms.

Unlike their technology equivalents, VC investments in biotech have
become bigger in recent years. The typical investment in 1997, for
example, was less than $10m. Nowadays, funding rounds of between $20m
to $25m are more common. Drug-development costs have risen steadily,
but so have the rewards . says Nick Galakatos, a partner with MPM
Capital, a Boston-based firm which raised a $900m fund in 2002.

There are good reasons why biotech deals might make long-term
sense. The new-product pipelines of the world's biggest drug firms
have recently been running dry. They are increasingly relying on much
smaller start-up and VC-backed firms to provide them with a flow of
new drugs. The idea is that start-ups will focus on research, passing
promising molecules on to bigger companies that are capable of
handling late-stage clinical trials and marketing, the costs of which
can run into the hundreds of millions of dollars. If a biotech
start-up succeeds, the big drug companies also sometimes like to buy
the entire firm, rather than just its products.

MPM, for example, homes in on potential treatments for diseases of the
central nervous system. One of its portfolio companies, Hypnion, is
trying to find a better sleeping pill. Mr Galakatos points to
America's rich and ageing population: only one-quarter of people who
have sleeping difficulties take any drug, he says. Hypnion is
searching for the gene or genes that control sleep, so that it can
target a drug more effectively to the disorder. So far, MPM has helped
Hypnion to raise $47m.

Like American venture capitalists, European firms are returning to
better days, although they never suffered as big a bust. Europe
remains a series of largely national markets for venture capital, and
European start-ups tend to aim to conquer these rather than to dream
of storming global markets. Further, Europe lacks a cluster with the
clout of Silicon Valley ., near Cambridge in Britain, is about as big
and successful as any, and it has seen a sharp slowdown in recent
years. Universities are becoming more reluctant to let academic
research, whether in biology or in engineering, mingle freely with
commerce. Disputes over the fruits of intellectual property are
becoming more common, and that is proving a barrier to VC investment.

European venture capitalists also seem more risk-averse than their
American competitors. That is partly because banks and corporations
still dominate early-stage investing. Industrial investors are more
interested in technologies that will help their established businesses
than in market-changing innovations.

 
 
 

 
In a new study, Thomas Hellman of Stanford Business School, Laura
Bottazzi of Bocconi University in Italy, and Marco Da Rin of the
University of Turin, argue that European venture capital is becoming
less parochial. The academics studied changes over the past five
years. Nowadays, it turns out, over half of European venture
capitalists have either an office or a partnership outside their home
country. That said, European VC funds are still hamstrung by tax rules
and regulations. For example, many pension funds are not allowed to
invest in assets that are deemed too riskyacle to many start-ups,
which often need the freedom to hire and fire staff at short notice
and cheaply just to survive. High taxes on capital gains also make it
less rewarding for entrepreneurs to incorporate in such countries,
which in turn puts off VC investors.

That could change. Britain is giving greater tax breaks to VC
investments. Gordon Brown, Britain's finance minister, recently
announced a doubling of the tax credit for VC trusts in his annual
budget. A few high-flyers have smelled profits. Paul Harvey recently
left a job as a technology investment banker with Goldman Sachs in
London to start Abbey Road Venture Partners. He reportedly wants to
raise $150m to invest in new technologies.

The European approach is certainly distinctive. European VC funds are
more likely to spend their time building or refining technologies,
rather than trying to develop an international brand or a company that
has its own global salesforce and marketing operations. That means the
Europeans are more likely to have a number of smalle r, rather than a
big American-styl e.

Anne Glover of Amadeus Capital Partners in London thinks that venture
capitalists will increasingly fund start-ups using a portfolio
approach in which individual VC firms team up with peers in order to
pool risks. For instance, the recently floated Cambridge Silicon Radio
had only three investors in its earliest funding rounds. More than a
dozen firms took part in its third round, in which it raised $25m.

But the real question facing the VC industry is whether, in better
times, it can maintain discipline. Experienced venture capitalists
recall that during the boom they received more new-business proposals
than they could read, let alone evaluate sensibly. If their post-boxes
begin to groan again, they should remember the days when a flood of
money caused them to drop their guard. With far less cash to play with
these days, they will have only themselves to blame for any future
debacle.

