Lethal injection 

Unconstitutional?

Apr 1st 2004 
From The Economist print edition


The Supreme Court examines the most commonly used method of execution

BACK in 1982, Texas became the first American state to carry out an
execution by lethal injection. It was regarded as a surer, cleaner and
above all more humane method than other forms of capital punishment
such as the electric chair, hanging, gas or firing squad (just
abolished in Utah). A decade later, lethal injection had become the
preferred method of execution in all but one of the 38 states that
still have the death penalty. Now it, too, is under threat.

In his appeal to the Supreme Court, heard this week, David Nelson, a
59-year-old triple murderer from Alabama, argued that the state's plan
to cut deep into his flesh and open his veins in order to inject him
with a lethal cocktail of chemicals amounted to a cruel and unusual
punishment, and as such was forbidden under the Eighth Amendment of
the American constitution. A less invasive operation was not possible,
he said, because his veins had been damaged by years of drug abuse.

The key issue before the court is a technical oneew Jersey has had no
executions since 1963; it was the principle that mattered. 

The lethal injections used by most states involve three drugs that
enter the condemned person's arm or leg through an intravenous
line. Sodium thiopental, an anaesthetic used in surgery, is first
injected to render the convict unconscious. This is followed by
pancuronium bromide, which paralyses the muscles and blocks breathing,
but leaves nerve and brain functions intact. Potassium chloride is
then administered to stop the heart. 

Those who have witnessed executions by lethal injection say the deaths
appear almost hauntingly serene, more evocative of an operating
theatre than the gallows. But it is now argued that this tranquillity
could be deceptive: if insufficient sodium thiopental has been
administered, a paralysed yet wide-awake patient could find himself
unable to speak, cry out or indicate his distress in any way as he
first slowly suffocates and then suffers a massive heart attack. Most
states' execution rules do not take account of the way people of
different sizes absorb anaesthetic.

Apart from Japan, which carries out very few executions, the United
States is the only big democracy to retain capital
punishment. Abolitionists have made some progress in recent years,
thanks to mounting worries about judicial error in capital
cases. Twelve of America's 50 states have abolished the punishment,
and several more have not used it since the Supreme Court reinstated
it in 1976 after a nine-year moratorium.

Since then, more than 900 executions have been carried out, half of
them in three states