Arab democracy 

Freedom calls, at last?

Apr 1st 2004 | CAIRO 
From The Economist print edition
 

There's little political or even economic freedom at present, but the
Arabs are starting to demand it

WHEN Tunisia cancelled a planned summit of Arab leaders it was to have
hosted this week, the move's abruptness was not the only surprise. The
Tunisians sniffed that they were scrapping the meeting because some of
those invited didn't like an agenda that included a pledge t o. The
surprise lay in the fact that such reforms were on the agenda at
all. There was also irony in the fact that Tunisia, one of the world's
quieter but more complete dictatorships, should be posing as a
champion of freedom. 

There is a different word for it in every Arab country, but the
principle is much the same. When Algerians speak of le pouvoir
(power), Saudi s, Egyptians al-hukm( ) and Lebanese thei r, all
describe a tight circle of people linked by shared background and
common interests, who have monopolised power for as long as anyone can
remember. But this enduring construct, which may be described a s, is
coming under increasing strain. 

A wave of democratisation is not yet washing across the region (see
table). The Arab League's 22 states remain the most uniformly
oligarchic slice of the world. Not a single Arab leader has ever been
peacefully ousted at the ballot box. Even sub-Saharan Africa does a
lot better: there, no less than 18 regimes have bowed out, at the
voters' behest, since 1990. Yet Arab countries face an unprecedented
convergence of internal and external challenges that are likely to
prompt sweeping change in the coming decade.

 
 
 

 


There are many reasons why this region has proved unusually resistant
to popular empowerment of the kind that is transforming such places as
eastern Europe, South-East Asia and Latin America. Many Middle Eastern
states are still young. Their borders often reflect the imperatives of
former European colonisers rather than local dispositions. So for the
past 50 years, Arab states have devoted their energies to
nation-building, an exercise that was seen to require political
centralisation, the forced mobilisation of resources and the
fabrication of new national identities to replace older affiliations. 

This often meant, in practice, the creation of bureaucracies that
became giant patronage networks; the appropriation, by the two-thirds
of Arab countries that are rich in energy, of oil revenues by the
central government; the suppression of minorities; and the promotion
of a culture of obedience through a controlled press and education
system. In many cases, such regimes were bolstered by the need to
confront perceived external threats, for instance from Israel, or by
the backing of foreign powers who wanted them as cold-war allies or
energy suppliers. At the same time, a dramatically swelling population
(the Arab League's has grown from 167m to 280m since 1980) and a
flight from the countryside to the towns have disoriented societies
and put yet another layer of dependency on the ruling class, whether
it be princely families in the Gulf states or the close-knit
associates of some despot in most Arab republics. 

But now these equations are changing. Nation-building, in many Arab
countries, is fairly complete. Few Tunisians or Egyptians or Omanis
question their national identity or deny the prerogatives of their
state. They would simply like more of a say in shaping policy. Even in
Saudi Arabia, where regional and confessional strains persist, few
citizens actually speak of seceding from the kingdom. Oppressive and
bleak as the place may seem to outsiders, Saudis are by and large
proud of their country. They are just rather tired of being told to
kiss the royal hand that feeds them. 



States versus nations
In other countries, nation-building, where the model presupposes
uniformity, has been ineffective. Witness chronic unrest in Algeria's
Kabylie region, recent rioting by Syria's 1m-plus Kurds, and the
simmering loathing of many Lebanese for both their own entrenched
political dynasties and for the mix of confessional partisanship and
Syrian malingering that props them in place. And then there is Iraq,
brutalised by Baathist rule and now in danger of being torn apart by
rivalries of every stripe. 

In any event, nearly all Arab countries are failing to meet the
expectations of their now highly urbanised, better educated and
politically aware people. A study by the Arab League says that in ten
years the region could have 50m jobless youths, up from 15m
today. Economic growth and productivity are low, scientific innovation
almost zero. Centralised bureaucracies have had roads and schools
built but have failed to spread wealth, channel investment efficiently
or foster critical thought. They are good at policing but bad at
providing even-handed justice.

The outside world has come to see these failures as dangerous to its
own well-being. The fact, for example, that 51% of Arab youths say
they want to emigrate, according to the UN's 2002 Arab Human
Development Report, alarms Europeans. Islamist terrorism to many minds
is a product of Arabs' frustration with their sense of
disempowerment. 

Arabs themselves now admit that something has gone very wrong and
needs fixing. Even their governments admit it. No fewer than five of
them forwarded reform plans to the Tunis summit. Yet few Arab citizens
take their governments' commitment, such as it is, terribly
seriously. 

So citizens have taken, with increasing urgency, to declaring that the
lack of democracy is the real root of their troubles. In the past few
months, from Libya to Syria to Saudi Arabia to Egypt, opposition
groups have issued petitions demanding a strikingly similar set of
changes. A recent gathering of 150 prominent Arab intellectuals in
Alexandria issued an endorsement of these main demands that was so
resounding it could have been drafted by Thomas Jefferson. It calls
for constitutional reforms to enshrine the separation of powers, free
elections, free speech, freedom to form parties, administrative
transparency and respect for fixed terms of office.

The impact of such initiatives has, to date, been minimal. Even in
those countries where democratic progress has been made, it has been
halting and feeble. Bahrain, for example, ended emergency laws and
held elections in 2002, but only for half of its legislature's
seats. Its four main opposition groups now demand fuller
freedoms. Saudi Arabia promised elections for half the seats on
municipal councils last year, a big step in a country with no
democratic institutions of any kind. But nothing has yet been done to
arrange such polls, supposedly due this year.

Yet governments cannot for long ignore the mounting pressures. Egypt,
for example, is rife with rumours that President Hosni Mubarak will
soon scrap the country's notorious emergency law and allow new
political parties. That would be wise. The country is ripe for change;
opposition forces, long divided and demoralised, now share a platform
calling for democratic freedoms. If Egypt, the most populous Arab
country, moves, others may well follow. Arab leaders may put off
meeting each other, but they cannot forever avoid a reckoning with
their own people. 

