
Italy's economy 

Berlusconi's desperate gamble

Apr 1st 2004 | ROME 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

The prime minister's last-ditch hopes of pepping up a moribund economy
may come to nothing

Get article background

HIS back to the wall, desperately thrusting and parrying, the hero
leaps for the chandelier. His assailants look on as he swings out of
reach. Silvio Berlusconi may hope that he has pulled off a similar
stunt with a pledge to slash taxes as a way of reviving both Italy's
economy and his political fortunes. But his enemies, and even some
allies, must wonder if he is more likely to come crashing to the
ground.

On March 26th Italy's prime minister was firmly on the
defensive. Several hundred thousand Italians took to the streets to
ask what happened to the economi c he promised when he was elected
three years ago. Trade unions said more than a million people marched
in 50 demonstrations on a day of nationwide stoppages billed as  a.

The strike was called to protest against the government's pension
reforms. But it turned into a general moan about the economy. It has
become clear that Italy's stalled economy is an even more pressing
concern for most voters than the government's unpopular reforms. The
issue looks certain to dominate the regional and European elections in
June, whose outcome may decide the fate of Mr Berlusconi's
government. After all, the besth unemployment fell to 8.7% in January,
down from 9.1% a year ago).

Mr Berlusconi's initial response to the strike was to renew a pledge
he had made last year to slash the top rate of income tax from 45% to
33%. He then added another: to cut the number of public
holidays. After protests from, among others, the Roman Catholic
church, he finessed this into a plan to shift public holidays to the
end or start of the week, to stop workers taking extra, unofficial
days popularly known as ponti (bridges).

That would certainly raise outputen. By the beginning of May, he
intends to outline plans for spending cuts of 6 billion ($7 billion),
to pay for a first round of tax reductions.

Mr Berlusconi's characteristically bold initiative wrong-footed his
coalition partners as much as his enemies. His deputy, Gianfranco
Fini, of the far-right National Alliance, who has been calling in vain
for ministers to get their policies endorsed by the cabinet before
announcing them to the public, was clearly irritated. He gave warning
that his party's support for the government was conditional on the
benefits not going only to the rich.

 
 
 

 
But can Italy afford tax cuts at all? In the long term, said the
economy minister, Giulio Tremonti, who clearly believes in the Laffer
curve, the government expects lower taxes to finance themselves by
stimulating growth, raising incomes and so restoring the shortfall in
revenue. But in the short term, even Mr Tremonti concedes that there
is bound to be a big gap. And he has ruled out cuts in spending on
health, welfare or public-sector pay.

Some margin for manoeuvre exists. Officials had already listed around
3.7 billion in savings that could be made this year, and another 8.5
billion next. Mr Fini's misgivings no doubt owe something to the fact
that the biggest single category earmarked for the axe consists of
subsidies for the poor south, whence his party draws much of its
support.

Mr Berlusconi wants to give away some 12 billion in tax cuts. But it
sounds as if he is considering bigger budget deficits as part of the
mix. He mused this week that busting the 3%-of-GDP ceiling imposed by
the euro area's stability pact woul d. Last year, Italy's budget
deficit was 2.4%. But that was largely due to one-off
measures. Without them, the figure would have been more than 4%.

Nick Eisinger, who monitors Italy for Fitch Ratings, sees the whole
exercise as bein g. He identifies two risks : Vincenzo Guzzo, European
economist at Morgan Stanley, reckons that, paradoxically, the
effectiveness of the cuts could depend on keeping to the euro's
rules .

Nor will lower taxes do much for deeper-seated flaws in Italy's
economy which, some believe, are the underlying reason for its
sluggishness. The country has too few big companies, too much
regulation, poor competitiveness, and not enough investment in new
technology.

Francesco Giavazzi, a professor of economics at Bocconi University,
Milan, says tha t He argues that much of the Italian expansion since
the oil shocks of the 1970s was down to reckless public spending in
the 1980s, and a devaluation in the 1990s. With neither option now
available, the faults of a structurally flawed economy are becoming
starker. If this analysis is right, it will take more than a tax
give-away to solve Italy's economic problems.



