Public opinion in Africa 

Confused democrats

Apr 1st 2004 
From The Economist print edition


A useful attempt to find out what Africans think

IT HAS been a turbulent week in Africa. Coup plots were foiled in both
Congo and Sudan, at least according to the governments who were the
alleged targets. Ctte d'Ivoire's security forces have been scything
demonstrators. Uganda's were accused of torturing dissidents with
nail-studded clubs. 

The most positive spin one can put on all this is that wars and coups
are rarer than they once were in Africa, and that Africans are fed up
with both. A new pan-African opinion poll*, conducted by the
Afrobarometer Network, a consortium of African and American social
scientists, has found strong support for democracy as the least bad
system of government, and an abhorrence of violence as a means of
resolving disputes. The poll was not perfectly representative: it was
done in only 15 out of 48 sub-Saharan countries, and the pollsters
understandably steered clear of war zones. Nonetheless, it is probably
the most comprehensive attempt yet to find out what Africans think.

Three-quarters of respondents said that violence for political ends
was never justified, even if those ends were just. Only in four
countriesct to one-party rule. Only 13% think tha t to a democratic
one. A further 22%, however, were not sure or thought it made no
difference to ordinary folk like themselves. And even in South Africa,
the richest and most sophisticated country in the sample, a
surprisingly high 20% of respondents thought that opposition parties
should be barred from standing for office. 

Economically, Africans tend to be statist but confused. They think the
government should buy their crops, they favour trade barriers and they
don't like to see bureaucrats sacked. But their answers are sometimes
contradictory. For example, 59% agreed that the government should pla
n. At the same time, however, 69% thought that individuals shoul d. 

How are African views changing? Afrobarometer carried out a similar,
12-country survey in 2000-2001. On most issues, Africans seem to have
become a shade more liberal since then. In specific countries,
however, moods have swung wildly. For example, 84% of Nigerians were
satisfied with the state of their democracy in January 2000, not long
after the end of military rule. Last year, this had plunged to 35%, as
elected politicians have proven no less corrupt than their
predecessors. At this weekend's local elections, some 50 people were
murdered. Nigeria's information minister said the voting had gone
well. 
