Quantum computing 

Bit by bit

Apr 1st 2004 | MONTREAL 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

Computing is driving the philosophical understanding of quantum theory

Get article background

FOR evidence of the power of simplicity, you need look no further than
a computer. Everything it does is based on the manipulation of binary
digits, or bitsere go on to achieve all the feats of the digital
age. But at each step of the complex operations involved, each bit has
a definite value.

The same cannot be said of many properties in quantum physics, such as
the spin of an atomic nucleus (loosely speaking, which way it is
pointing) or the position of an electron orbiting such a nucleus. At a
small scale, such properties can have more than one value at once. In
1994, Peter Shor, a mathematician then at AT&T's Bell Laboratories in
New Jersey, realised that a computer that used such quantum properties
to represent information could factorise large numbers extremely
quickly. This is an important problem, because much of modern
cryptography is based on the difficulty of factorising large
numbersereting of the American Physical Society, the largest physics
conference in the world.

There are currently several different approaches to quantum computing,
all of which rely on fundamentally different technologies, including
ultra-cold ions that are cooled by lasers, pulses of laser light,
nuclear-magnetic resonance and solid-state devices such as
superconducting junctions or quantum dots (which are confined clouds
of electrons). What all these technologies have in common is that they
can be used to invoke and exploit the bizarre phenomenon of
superposition.

Superposition is not simple. Though a qubit may, for a while, be in a
state of superposition between 0 and 1, it must eventually choose
between the two. And in even the best quantum computers, that choice,
o r, happens in a fraction of a millisecond. Just how the choice is
made, and how to prolong the preceding period o f that allows quantum
computations to be made, constitute a long-unexplained gap at the
heart of modern physics. For nearly 80 years, since the inception of
quantum theory in the 1920s, most physicists were content to gloss
over the process. What is perhaps surprising is that the technological
challenge of quantum computing is now a driving force behind efforts
to understand the most abstract and philosophical underpinnings of
quantum mechanics.



Echoes of the future
Until a qubit interacts with the macroscopic world, which follows the
classical laws of physics, it behaves according to the laws of quantum
mechanics, which are well understood, at least by physicists. However,
the interaction with the classical worldn the two are something that,
until the advent of quantum computing, most physicists chose to remain
agnostic about. Some even quipped that the answer to that question was
beyond the realm of physics. Measurement was thought to occur
instantaneously, and its effects were added to the theory ad hoc.

But decoherence, though it occurs on a short time scale, happens
gradually, unlike the instantaneous idea of measurement. It can thus
be investigated. Wojciech Zurek, of America's Los Alamos National
Laboratory in New Mexico, discussed his research group's efforts to
investigate decoherence. They recently proved that the rate at which
decoherence occurs can be measured by something called the Loschmidt
echo. The Loschmidt echo, named after a 19th-century German physicist,
is an observable experimental measure of the sensitivity of a quantum
system to changes in the energy of the system. (The exact form it
takes depends on what sort of physical system is being considered.) Dr
Zurek expects that the link between decoherence and the Loschmidt echo
should aid theoretical understanding of decoherence.

In a less abstract tack, several papers presented at the conference
showed how decoherence could actually be combated. Although the naive
expectation is that any interaction between the qubits of a quantum
system and the outside world will provoke decoherence, it turns out
that the right kind of external signals can in fact prolong the period
of coherence.

Chikako Uchiyama of Yamanashi University, in Japan, discussed how, in
the general case, the application of very short pulses, poetically
known as bang-bang pulses, at regular intervals can serve not only to
suppress decoherence, but also to maintain entanglementing technology
in questionrence occurs in specific systems, such as superconducting
junctions, or quantum dots. The promise of quantum computation,
spurred on by the insights of Dr Shor and Dr Grover, is inciting
physicists to probe, experimentally and theoretically, the junction
between the quantum and the classical. They seem to be finding that
the process of decoherence is more gradual, quantifiable and open to
investigation than was previously suspected. Though a useful quantum
computer is probably still many years away, the field of quantum
computing is well on its way to solving its first problem. 

