Iraq 

A wider war, a wider worry

Apr 7th 2004 | SADR CITY, BAGHDAD 
From The Economist print edition


Getty 
 


Iraq has entered a particularly bad patch. Is it a bloody blip or are
the Americans sinking into a quagmire?

Get article background

IT HAS been one of the worst weeks for the Americans since they
toppled Saddam Hussein a year ago. For the first time, they are facing
a war on two fronts now, perhaps more worryingly, against a
substantial group of Shia Muslims whose wider community has hitherto
been the Americans' main Iraqi Arab allies. Fortunately, Iraq's Kurds,
in the north, who make up about a fifth of the population, are still
friendly. 

The sense is growing that the Americans need to turn things round
fast, militarily and politically, if they are to ensure that events do
not spin out of control. They have less than three months in which to
choose a provisional government to take over much of the running of
Iraq just Mr Sadr's rabid constituency of the downtrodden, turned
against the Americans, that would spell real trouble. Mr Sadr claims
he is fighting for Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistani, the Shias' most
influential clergyman, whom the Americans have crucially kept on
board, just. Some analysts say most Shias are now edging towards Mr
Sadr's side. So far, the leaders of the mainstream Shia parties, and
the more moderate clergy that they look to, including Mr Sistani, have
been silent or equivocal about the Americans' decision to thump Mr
Sadr's lot. 

In the early hours of April 4th, in the biggest American assault since
the conventional war a year ago, dozens of tanks and helicopter
gunships had bombarded Baghdad's sprawling Shia townships. More than
1,000 American troops swarmed in, recapturing government buildings and
police stations that Mr Sadr' s had taken over. At least 50 Iraqis
were killed in Baghdad alone, for the loss, in the next three days, of
at least eight American soldiers.

At least the Americans' British allies had managed, by April 7th, to
dislodgeassault on an American camp.

A striking feature of the turbulence was the failure of Iraq's
fledgling police to stand up to the rebels. Though their numbers have
risen from 30,000 last July to over 78,000 today, they are clearly no
match yet for determined militiamen such as those of Mr Sadr. In
Baghdad this week, they simply abandoned their stations. Elsewhere,
some switched sides. 



Just two little jobs
The Americans have two immediate tasks. First, and most urgently, they
must quell Mr Sadr's uprising without spilling so much blood that the
entire Shia community joins the revolt. Second, they must redouble
their efforts to create a provisional Iraqi government that has a
chance of gaining a modicum of acceptance. 

Those two tasks may be connected. Paul Bremer, Iraq's American
governor, says Mr Sadr must be arrested. But it is possible, if the
rebellion is to be brought to an end within the next few days or so,
that the Americans might have to eat humble pie and negotiate with
him. He might then demand posts in an emerging transitional government
which, under the latest plan, would hold office until a general
election takes place to choose a constituent assembly by the end of
next January.

 
 
 

 


George Bush insists his resolve is unshaken (see article). Since the
last big upsurge in violence, in November (see charts), Iraq had grown
a bit less bloody. But it remains far too high for the comfort of
ordinary Iraqis or foreign investors. This week's Baghdad Expo trade
fair had to be postponed. The main roads to Jordan and Syria have been
closed. 



But the politics needs fixing too
To show that he means business on the political front, Mr Bremer has
been speeding up the transfer of authority to Iraqis. After handing
the health ministry over to Iraqi administration, he has now declared
that the education and public-works ministries are under Iraqi
control. And he has appointed Iraqis as defence minister and as head
of intelligence. 

Yet the search for a provisional government is proving tricky. The
Americans are counting on Lakhdar Brahimi, the UN's special envoy now
visiting Iraq, to help find a consensus to produce a government in
which all Iraqi groups feel represented. But Mr Brahimi has no magic
wand, and the UN, its reputation tarnished in many Iraqi eyes by its
alleged misuse of Iraq's oil revenues, lacks authority. 

A three-man presidency is still on the cards. The three most-mooted
candidates are Adnan Pachachi, a Sunni who was once foreign minister;
Ibrahim al-Jaafari, who heads Dawa, still probably the most popular
Shia party; and Massoud Barzani, one of the Kurds' two main
leaders. It is less clear who might be prime minister. Nor has Mr
Bremer decided how to create a transitional assembly. Most Iraqis and
Americans involved hope that a UN resolution will give a stamp of
approval to whatever government emerges. 

Can Mr Sadr be brought into the game? For all his impulsive ranting,
he counts for more than the Americans and his Shia rivals have liked
to acknowledge. The scion of Iraq's most prominent clerical family, he
wins much kudos because, unlike most of the present Governing
Council's members, he stayed in Iraq to fight Mr Hussein. His father,
shot in 1999, was a grand ayatollah who preached against Baathist
rule. An uncle was a founder of Dawa. An ancestor was prime minister
under the British. 

He appeals to Iraq's have-nots, who number many millions. In his
sermons he plays on Iraqis' sense of victimhood. When Mr Bremer
recently shut down one of Mr Sadr's newspapers, which had incited
Iraqis to attack American troops and blamed America for a car-bomb
attack that killed over 50 policemen two months ago, Mr Sadr said that
Muslims were being censored. When the Americans arrested one of Mr
Sadr's friends on a charge of murdering a prominent rival cleric last
summer, Mr Sadr accused Mr Bremer of manipulating the justice system.

Plainly, Mr Sadr is not an easy man to deal with. But if he were
killed or turned into a martyr, his legacy might be bloodier still. He
has certainly become a bigger piece in Iraq's perplexing jigsaw. 



