Iraq 

The challenge in Iraq 

Apr 7th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


It was one of the worst weeks so far. But it would still be wrong to
write Iraq off

Reuters 
 
 

PLAINLY, it is bad. For the first time in more than a year of
occupation, the Americans find themselves in armed conflict with a
well-organised militia of Shias, the 60% or so of Iraqis who were
repressed especially brutally by Saddam Hussein and had hitherto
seemed willing if not entirely happy to co-operate with his
removers. If this fight continues or spreads, the Americans and their
allies will indeed, as all the pundits say, be facing an insurgency on
two fronts. Having failed to subdue the minority Sunnis, some of whom
have spent many months in open rebellion in the so-calle d west of the
capital, the occupiers would also have to contend with a Shia uprising
in Baghdad and in the south (see article). This is a grim
prospect. But does it amount, as Senator Edward Kennedy says, t o? And
is Iraq on the brink of  a? Not yet, on both scores. 



Brute force versus the people's will

The United States spent a decade in Vietnam and lost some 50,000
soldiers. The conquest and occupation of Iraq have so far claimed just
over 600 Americans. Although this was a bloody spelln to do, norenough
American exit. That is to say, a President Bush or Kerry could in
conscience declare at such a point that America had given Iraq its
democratic opportunity and summon the troops back home. So in
practical terms, the question of whether the Americans ca n in Iraq
boils down to this. Is America willing and able to hold the ring for
the year and a half or so until that election takes place?

The honest answer is that success is not certain. It is all too easy
after this nerve-jangling week to imagine a sequence of events in
which the occupiers become so unpopular that the coalition forces are
compelled to quit early, leaving Iraqis to sort or fight things out
for themselves. Even if matters do not reach that pass, the violence
might swell to a level that prevents the holding of a fair election on
the Americans' timetable. The uncertainty, however, cuts both ways; if
success is not certain, failure is not guaranteed either. Many a
country awash in violence has nonetheless managed the transition to
democracy. South Africa, which is celebrating ten years of it this
week, was in the early 1990s embroiled in a vicious three-cornered
struggle between whites, Zulus and Xhosas. And if you look carefully
at Iraq, there are still reasons for optimism.

One is that Iraq is not yet gripped by anything that can be properly
described as a civil war. It may be scant comfort for the Americans,
but it is their troops rather than fellow Iraqis who have become the
target of choice for the country's insurgents. This is something of a
surprise. Before last year's invasion, the fear of many outsiders was
that an Iraq freed from Saddam's iron fist would splinter three ways
as Kurds, Sunnis and Shias battled each other for independence (in the
case of the Kurds) or supremacy (in the case of the Sunnis and
Shias). For the time being, however, Iraqis have stubbornly resisted
the expected trifurcation. Not even the terrible bombings during the
Ashoura festival last month, which killed some 200 Shias, succeeded in
provoking the anti-Sunni backlash the perpetrators were presumably
hoping for. 



The spiritual leader and the upstart
Calculation rather than docility explains this forbearance. Many
Iraqis appear to believe that a peaceful transition to democracy
serves their own interests. Despite loose talk of Iraq falling into
anarchy, polls suggest that most Iraqis think that their lot has
improved since the fall of the dictator, and will continue to
improve. This expectation of better times to come is a precious asset
that Mr Bremer must not squander as the transition unfolds. Another is
the belief of the Shias, guided by their spiritual leader Grand
Ayatollah Ali Sistani, that as the majority they have much to gain
from democracy. Until this month, Mr Bremer had made a great point of
keeping Mr Sistani reasonably happy: it was at the ayatollah's behest
that America dropped its plan to use caucuses to select a
constitution-writing body and proposed a direct election instead. 

Now the challenge for Mr Bremer is to find a way to ensure that his
broad alliance with the Shias survives this week's clashes with the
militia commanded by Mr Sadr. Having missed earlier opportunities
either to co-opt this firebrand or to smack him down, the Americans
have pronounced him a n to be arrested. Perhaps this was necessary for
the coalition to save face in the teeth of Mr Sadr's provocation and
incitement, but it still entails taking a risk. Though the young Mr
Sadr is a junior cleric compared with the revered Mr Sistani, the
latter has no divisions whereas the former commands a disciplined
militia that has flexed its muscles from Baghdad to Basra. And though
in private Mr Sistani doubtless considers Mr Sadr a reckless upstart,
not even Mr Sistani will take America's side if Mr Bremer's troops
kill too many Shias when they take the upstart on. Like many a
proconsul before him, Mr Bremer faces the delicate task, more
political art than political science, of showing just enough toughness
to command respect, while refraining from actions that turn more
hearts and minds against him. 

Part of the same calculation is whether to let the latest violence
derail the plan to hand over power before the end of June to an
interim Iraqi administration that is likely to emerge from the
existing American-appointed Governing Council. On the evidence so far,
Mr Bush's declared intention to stick to the deadline is
right. America has chopped and changed its plans often enough. To do
so again simply because of a new spurt of violence would look
indecisive and weak, even though this vaunted transfer of power will
be a pretty notional affair. The occupying authority intends to
dissolve itself, and the American presence will shrink to an
embassy. But it will be an embassy like no other, pretending to defer
to Iraq's interim government while issuing orders to America's
occupying army and therefore still calling most of the shots. 

It is this periodh largely a creature of the Americans, the interim
government will include representatives of most of the country's sects
and political movements. It has the potential to earn respect, prepare
the ground for elections and make the occupation feel less like an
occupation. Only if it fails, and has to depend increasingly on
American firepower to impose its authority, will Iraq really begin to
resemble Vietnam.



  
 

