Corruption in Latin America 

Harder graft

Apr 7th 2004 | MIAMI 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

Th e has spawned a battle against corruption in Latin America 

SINCE September 11th, the United States has become more sensitive
about some threats that it once seemed resigned to living with. In its
own backyard, one of the old enemies it has begun to engage more
vigorously is Latin American corruption. The days when crooked leaders
could launder their embezzled money in Florida with impunity may be
coming to an end. Corrupt officials are also losing another asset,
which many prize almost as highly as cash: their American visas.

Using little-noticed provisions of the United States' controversial
Patriot Actrty seized from Mr Jerez in Florida, and plan to hand over
a cheque for $5m to the Nicaraguan government. Tony Arico, a former
financial-crimes investigator with the FBI and head of the pilot
scheme until last week, hopes the $5m is only the start :

Investigators have now turned their attention to two other Latin
American leaders, both of whom fled their countries soon after leaving
office: Gustavo Noboa, once president of Ecuador; and Alfonso
Portillo, an ex-president of Guatemala. Government officials and bank
executives from the Dominican Republic, who were implicated in the
collapse of Banco Intercontinental last year, are also under
scrutiny. If the cases reach court, provisions in the Patriot Act have
greatly expanded the range of evidence that can be used, which now
includes material gathered clandestinely by intelligence agencies that
was previously deemed inadmissible.



Sling your hooks
The second new weapon against Latin American graft, also derived from
the Patriot Act, is to deny or revoke the visas of corrupt
functionaries, or PEPs (short for politically exposed persons'). In
the past, visas could be revoked only in cases involving
drug-trafficking, people-smuggling or war crimes. Ernesto Samper,
Colombia's former president, lost his visa under those provisions,
after he had been accused of accepting drug money in his election
campaign. Ernesto Pirez Balladares, Panama's former president, lost
his in 1999 for alleged involvement in a Chinese immigration
racket. But a much broader spectrum of public graft can now be
punished by the curtailment of holidays and residence in the United
States.

The discretionary nature of visas makes them an ideal anti-corruption
lever, since there is no need to wait for someone suspected of
corruption to be convicted by local courtsowever , says one source. It
includes a number of top government personalities, such as former
heads of state, ministers and generals, as well as several
well-connected bankers. The scandals in the Dominican Republic and
Guatemala resulted in several visas being withdrawn. Mr Portillo, the
Guatemalan, was stripped of his last month.

The United States has in the past been criticised for tolerating
corruption, especially when its political allies in the region were
implicated. Two reasons lie behind the decision to get tough now. One,
the national-security argument, is that public corruption, and the
instability it can bring about, help terrorists seeking to smuggle
weapons or launder money. A second arises from a rethink of
Washington's foreign-aid policy. In 2002 the Bush administration
pledged to increase its aid budget by 50%. But, like other
governments, it does not want to waste taxpayers' money on bent
regimes. (A new UN convention on corruption may help to encourage
co-operation against cross-border graft.)

America's critics argue that the new policy, whatever the motives
behind it, is long overdue in a region racked by almost endemic public
thievery. But some are still not satisfied: the only way to tackle the
problem of money-laundering properly, they say, is to pursue the
financial institutions that enable the transfers of dirty cash
. argues Charles Intriago, a former federal prosecutor who now
publishes Money Laundering Alert, a financial-crimes newsletter. Unless
the American government prosecutes the American handlers of the money,
then the message is never going to get across.
