Urban development (2) 

The whims of the fathers

Apr 7th 2004 | MEMPHIS, TENNESSEE 
From The Economist print edition


What exactly is the meaning of the wor d?

WHEN you have a great big brawling river like the Mississippi running
past your town, it is only sensible to make something of it. So when
John Overton, Andrew Jackson (the country's seventh president) and
James Winchester founded Memphis, Tennessee, in the early 19th
century, they proclaimed that development along the banks should never
impede free access to a panoramic view of the river. And they even
said that changes along a designated promenade could not be made
without their heirs' approval.

City officials these days find these stipulations quaint. The founding
fathers of Memphis obviously had no idea how much the city would need
to grow and how much it would want, eventually, to have a vibrant
riverfront like those in St Louis and New Orleans. Already, the
Memphis promenade has shrunk to about half its original size because
of unstructured development. What is not garages or ugly slapped-up
buildings is often just a stretch of muddy grass with graffiti-covered
litter bins. 

Now the Riverfront Development Corporation (RDC), a non-profit
organisation, has voted to approve a new plan, which would re-open
some of this land and return stunning views of the river to
water-lovers. It would also feature new 30-storey buildings, with
flats and boutiques, that will inevitably block some views of the
river that the founders wanted to conserve. Still, as the RDC points
out, revitalisation breeds consumers, who will enjoy the river all the
more while sipping on a gourmet coffee and chatting with friends. 

The plan has split the city. Preservationists worry that once dollars
start pouring into the project, development will know no
bounds. Instead of grass and mud, the river area will become a
concrete wonderland; and those glorious sunsets, looking over the
river to sprawling Arkansas, will be seen on postcards only. Virginia
McLean, the leader of a preservation group called Friends for Our
Riverfront, believes open green space better suits Memphis's future
than yet more concrete and steel; and, as an Overton heir, she will
have a big say in what happens. But other members of the family, who
live in Nashville, think more modern buildings are just what Memphis
needs.

The Memphis city council casts its votes on the plan this
month. Whatever happens, it will probably end up in court, and legal
arguments are likely to rage over the actual meaning in the founding
fathers' minds of the wor d. In fact, when the trio bestowed an
easement to the land in 1828, they made sure that the land should be
public fo r. 

Perhaps they knew all too well the changeable minds of Memphis
citizens. A stroll away from the embattled promenade stands the
13-year-old, $65m Pyramid, built in homage to the Egyptian variety,
which was meant to be the region's main sports and concert arena. Now
its future is in doubt; attention has shifted to new
multi-million-dollar sporting and music facilities only a few blocks
away, in another revitalised part of town, where historic buildings
have been razed to make room for the new. There is every chance that,
in another ten years, the RDC's sparkling apartments and shops
overlooking the Mississippi will face the same bleak future as the
once-loved Pyramid. 



