How to stop butterflies mating 

No love, no pests

Apr 7th 2004 | UPPSALA 
From The Economist print edition


Natura l might be employed instead of insecticides 

AS ROMANTIC gifts go, an anti-aphrodisiac sounds like the bottom of
the heap. However, in the world of butterflies, it just might be the
perfect present. Johan Andersson of Sweden's Royal Institute of
Technology has discovered that some species of butterfly use
anti-aphrodisiac chemicals when mating, and that such chemicals
benefit both parties. However, that benefit may be short-lived, for Dr
Andersson hopes to hijack the anti-aphrodisiacs to keep the
butterflies in question (or, rather, their caterpillars) from
consuming their favourite foodstuff by Dr Andersson use different
substances as anti-aphrodisiacs. The male green-veined white butterfly
(Pieris napi) delivers methyl salicylate, a close relative of
aspirin. The small cabbage white (Pieris rapae) uses a combination of
methyl salicylate and indole. The substance used by the large cabbage
white (Pieris brassicae) is benzyl cyanide. The arrangement benefits
all parties. The first male is guaranteed paternity. Subsequent
suitors can choose not to waste their sperm in competition with ones
that have got a head start in the race to fertilise the female's
eggs. And the female herself is not subject to sexual harassment while
she is not fertile.

If this discovery had been made about almost any other genus of
butterfly, that would probably be the end of the matter. But Pieris
brassicae is a big pest in eastern Europe, Russia and India. The
caterpillar of Pieris rapae is, as its name suggests, even more
rapacious. In North America it is known as the imported cabbage worm,
since it was accidentally introduced there from Europe in the
mid-1800s. Nowadays, it damages crops of cabbages, Brussels sprouts,
cauliflowers, broccoli and turnips all around the world. At the
moment, it and its kin are controlled by killing them with
insecticides. But deploying anti-aphrodisiacs to stop them breeding
might be more effective.

That, at least, is Dr Andersson's hope. To which end he recently ran a
pilot trial using the newly discovered anti-aphrodisiacs. The result
was almost complete protection for the crops involved. Large-scale
trials should follow soon.


