French foreign policy 

Of entente, understanding and Verstdndnis

Apr 7th 2004 | PARIS 
From The Economist print edition


AP 
 
 

 

Beyond the jamboree to mark the centenary of the entente cordiale lie
some awkward choices for France's foreign policy

Get article background

THE Union flag flutters up and down the Champs Elysies. Le Monde, a
left-leaning newspaper, devotes its entire 90-page magazine to
Britain. Queen Elizabeth II's visit to France this week kicks off six
months of festivities to mark the centenary of the entente cordiale, a
colonial-era deal between Britain and France that ended centuries of
military hostility. Tony Blair, Britain's prime minister, visits Paris
next month. Jacques Chirac, the French president, goes to London in
the autumn. The awkwardness is that these resolutely upbeat
celebrations take place at a time when the Franco-British relationship
is one of deep ambivalence. 

Based on a rapprochement secured in part by the francophile Edward
VII, the queen's great-grandfather, and Thiophile Delcassi, French
foreign minister, the 1904 pact reflected the two colonial powers'
desire to resolve long-running territorial disputes. But the two also
shared a common suspicion of Germany's growing military and naval
strength. At the time, France's relationship with Britain was its most
important foreign alliance. They were two fellow imperialists. Their
rivalry, and mutual suspicion, ran deep. 

Today, France's links with Britain grab relatively little
attention. Even in warm moments, the relationship pales next to that
between France and Germany. Yet these are shifting times. Mr Blair is
in some ways more open towards continental co-operationSchrvder even
invited Mr Chirac to stand in for him at one EU summit. Politicians
and officials are in regular contact across the Rhine. A joint youth
secretariat organises school exchanges. The adviser on Germany for
Jean-Pierre Raffarin, French prime minister, is a German diplomat,
Christoph Gottschalk. Hundreds of Germans have graduated from France's
Ecole Nationale d'Administration, its elite civil-service
college. This year, for the first time, three are joining the French
civil service. 

In short, working with Germany has become the first reflex of every
French official. For the past two years, the pair have carefully
secured agreement ahead of any big international meeting. They stand
shoulder-to-shoulder over the new European Union constitution. They
are now trying to thrash out differences over the entry of Turkey into
the EU, an unpopular idea in France (and in some quarters in Germany,
too) ., says one official ,

For all this teamsmanship, however, there are two weaknesses. The
first is that the Franco-German relationship works only because the
two sides work so hard at it . comments one top French
diplomat. Ordinary French people do not voluntarily drift towards
Germany, often preferring to go to Britain (or even America). Young
Frenchmen head for jobs in London's banks, restaurants and football
teams, not to Frankfurt or Berlin. Mr Raffarin's daughter has studied
in Britain; a step-daughter of Nicolas Sarkozy, the new finance
minister, is also studying there. 

When Franco-German interests coincide, as they did over Iraq, or over
junking the euro's stability pact, the alliance looks strong. Mr
Chirac and Mr Schrvder may not have much mutual affection, but they
are deft politicians who realise their common interest. French
officials are keenly aware, however, that Germany's interests may not
always be so neatly aligned.

This touches the second weakness: uncomfortable as it is, the French
realise that they cannot use the Franco-German axis to steer an EU of
25 as they did the original six. Already, over Iraq, the newcomers
have found Mr Chirac's bullying intolerable. Used to co-running the
club, the French find meetings of 25 exasperating. As one French
official puts it :

Mr Chirac's solution is what he call s. The most important of these
today is European defence. Which is why the French have had to turn to
Britain, a fellow military power, rather than to Italy, Spain or
others. The French are keen on more ad hoc trilateral projects, such
as the joint French, British and German foreign ministers' effort over
nuclear proliferation in Iran, and on informal trilateral talks that
increasingly take place in the corridors of meetings of the full
25. The small countries may not like this, but at least it gets things
done.

The really nettlesome issue, however, is how all this relates to
America. France's impulse behind its European ideas remains the desire
to balance American power. Mr Chirac envisages a futur e world, in
which American power is countered, like it or not, by China or even
Russia. Since Europe, he argues, cannot afford to be left out, it
needs to equip itself militarilywho find such deference to America
unmanly in a sovereign power. 

The French know that, when forced to choose, Britain believes that its
interests are best served by aligning with America. This is always
going to make it an uncertain European partner. For all the goodwill
this week, Franco-British trust does not run deep. A poll in
Libiration this week showed that 84% of the French say they trust the
Germans, but only 51% trust the British. And even the British trusted
the Germans more than they did the French. Plus ga change.

