Lexington 

When good news spells trouble

Apr 7th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

The recovery isn't jobless after all. What should John Kerry do?

Get article background

OVER the past 70 years or so, one thing that has not changed is
American politicians' readiness to make comparisons between the
present times and the Great Depression. John Kerry, indeed, has built
his candidacy for the White House on the technique. He campaigns
against Georg e Bush for presiding ove r. This week, Mr Kerry and his
Democratic big-gun supporters spread out across the country to
highlight the candidate' s for the economy, one that will create 10m
jobs rather than destroy them, as Mr Bush prefers to do. There was
much talk of the Depression along the way.

Elsewhere in the West, it is generally accepted that people no longer
live in black-and-white lines, with their coat collars turned up. But
in the United States, surely the comparisons are justified? A lot of
Americans think so, as any morning spent tuned to the call-in shows
will testify. After all, are Americans not working ever-longer hours
just to keep above water? Is not their private prosperity being
appropriated both by a rapacious government and by corporations making
record profits? Are not jobs being destroyed at a vicious pace? And
are not low-wage countries like China and India to blame? 

Mr Kerry certainly thinks so. And yet, by so many measures, life in
the United States shows steady, material improvement. Americans, on
average, spend less of their lives at work than ever before. Companies
are indeed making record profits and, in recent months at least, have
grabbed a bigger share of the national pie. Yet household income is
growing, and American private wealth is also at a record, standing at
$44 trillion, give or take. And though the chances of finding a new
job are lower, the chances of losing your job in the first place are
less than during the boom of the 1990s.

Many people will buy none of this, and the one irrefutable concern
that has grabbed Americans' attention this year is the flood of jobs
going overseas. Now, if your textile mill in West Virginia closes
down, that is very bad news indeed for you and for your community. But
at the national level, more jobs are outsourced to America than the
other way around. American workers, in other words, are net
beneficiaries of outsourcing (it goes without saying that consumers
always were). And in the cross-border trade of white-collar services,
a chief concern, America's surplus with the rest of the world is not
shrinking; it is growing.

These points will not bother a Democratic presidential candidate, so
long as the economic mood in the country remains ornery, and so long
as he can point to net job losses (over 2m of them in this case) under
the incumbent. No matter that the recession which caused the losses
began two months before Mr Bush took office.

So how do a month's good job figures affect the picture? Enough to
cause Air Force One to break out with riotous glee on April 2nd, when
March's employment report was beamed up to it. Enough, indeed, to
suspect that even as he welcomed the news (he could hardly do other),
Mr Kerry also felt a foreboding in the pit of his stomach. For not
only had 308,000 jobs been created in March; the number of new jobs in
January and February were also revised sharply upwards. Far from a
job s, if this trend carries on it will look very much like a robust
jobs recovery.



Thinking the unthinkable
Even then, a Democratic candidate will not necessarily give up
hope. For employment in one area of the economy, namely manufacturing,
has been in secular decline for decades. From that point of view,
bemoaning job losses in manufacturing seems a sure-fire bet,
particularly since 2.7m jobs have been lost since 2001, a largely
cyclical decline. And it so happens that the key swing states in the
coming election are ones that have seen manufacturing jobs lost in
droves: Ohio, Michigan and Pennsylvania. Perhaps the chief plank of Mr
Kerry's economic policy so far is to channel tax credits to
manufacturing firms seen to be losing jobs overseas.

Time, then, to think the unthinkable: a recovery in manufacturing
jobs. There are reasons to believe one may be under way. The
beneficial effects of a cheaper dollar are starting to be felt, with
output climbing. A closely-watched survey by the Institute for Supply
Management reports hiring among manufacturers at a 16-year high
(though the government's employment report still paints a less robust
picture). Firms appear to be rebuilding their inventories, and they
will presumably need to hire more workers to do that.

For Mr Bush, March's employment report has recharged a flickering
campaign. The more jobs that are now created, the less the president
needs to defend his economic record, which is certainly open to
criticism. Mr Bush, after all, has at times caved in to protectionist
pressures. And even the tax cuts at the core of his economic campaign
could have delivered a far bigger bang for the buck. They are highly
regressive, favouring those who live off income more than salary. And
they may even have helped delay the jobs recovery, thanks to tax
provisions allowing businesses to write off against tax a higher
proportion of any capital investment they make. That made it cheaper,
other things equal, to invest in machines rather than people.

With jobs growth, Mr Bush does not need seriously to rebut such
matters. But for Mr Kerry, all this is uncomfortable. His proposals
for a bleak world are sweeping for instance, he proposes to provide
cover for the 40m-plus Americans who currently lack health insurance
and they are costly, for he is also committed to halving the federal
deficit. He now has no choice: the better the economy gets, the
bleaker his message will have to become. Will voters still buy it?

