Central European nationalism 

Populist watch

Apr 7th 2004 | VILNIUS 
From The Economist print edition


A populist resurgence in central Europe 

Get article background

AS IF by some compensatory principle, central Europe lost one pariah
president this week just as another loomed into view. The departing
figure was Rolandas Paksas, the scandal-swamped president of
Lithuania, dismissed by a parliamentary vote on April 6th after 15
months in office. His main sin was to surround himself with
ill-qualified cronies who had interfered in government decisions at
the behest of business and perhaps even criminal interests. The
favourite to succeed him is Valdas Adamkus, a decent and elderly
centrist who was Mr Paksas's predecessor as president; or, if he
chooses to run, Algirdas Brazauskas, another ex-president who is
currently prime minister. 

A new candidate has emerged to take over as Europe's least-admired
head of state west of Minsk: Vladimir Meciar, who won a first round of
voting for Slovakia's presidency on April 3rd and looks likely to win
the run-off on April 17th. As prime minister of Slovakia until 1998,
Mr Meciar was a backward-looking bully and at times scarcely a
democrat, though he claims to have changed for the better. 

In both Lithuania and Slovakia, the presidency is mainly
ceremonial. But a bad incumbent can still be a nuisance to the
government, a diplomatic embarrassment, and a danger to national
security. Mr Paksas crossed into the danger zone when he came under
the spell of a dubious Russian-born businessman called Yuri
Borisov. Mr Borisov bankrolled Mr Paksas's presidential campaign.

Foreign governments pressed Lithuania to clean house before it joined
NATO last week and the European Union on May 1st. Mr Paksas helped to
speed his own demise by trying to give Mr Borisov a job even after
impeachment proceedings were under way. This gesture cost the
president most waverers in parliament, and caused some to question his
state of mind. But Mr Paksas, who is not yet 50, had some 40% of the
public on his side at the height of impeachment proceedings, according
to Vilmorus, a Lithuanian polling firm. He may yet return as a force
in national politics, longing for the social benefits, simple lives
and guaranteed jobs that communism once promised them. Mr Paksas and
other regional populists, whether of right or left, play to similar
audiences. Poverty ensures a loud voice in politics for anger and
envy, which blur into bigoted nationalism. 

A rising protest vote in Poland has turned a small-farmers' movement,
Samoobrona, into a leading political party. An unreformed Communist
Party is gaining ground in the Czech Republic. In Romania, which hopes
to join the EU in 2007, the xenophobic Greater Romania Party enjoys
not only popularity but respectability. Even Slovenia, the richest and
primmest of this year's EU entrants, voted overwhelmingly in a
referendum on April 4th against restoring civic rights to members of
ethnic minorities denied citizenship without cause after independence
in 1991. 

Prosperity will no doubt smooth such rough edges. But it will take
decades to reach most of central Europe. If the likes of Mr Meciar or
Samoobrona get their way, it may never arrive in some countries. 


