North-East Asian diplomacy 

Ties that grind

Apr 7th 2004 | TOKYO 
From The Economist print edition


Economic links are driving new diplomacy in North-East Asia
AFP 
 
 
Triangular Kawaguchi
 
ONE measure of the distrust among Japan, China and South Korea is that
they often need other countries to give them an excuse to talk. The
three nations' leaders and foreign ministers meet every year as guests
of their distant neighbours in the Association of South-East Asian
Nations. Japan's prime minister, Junichiro Koizumi, met China's
president, Hu Jintao, twice last yearnationalists on the Senkakus, a
disputed set of islands near Taiwan that Japan seized more than a
century ago.

Although history and nationalism grab the headlines, however, there is
another way to view all of this bluster. Instead of showing that
closer ties are impossible, the mutual accusations and demands for
apologies may be more in the nature of ritualistic display, while
better relations are quietly constructed. Fast-growing trade and
investment links, after all, are rapidly pulling North-East Asia's
economies into closer contact (see article). 

Business and economic ventures are already blazing the trail for the
diplomats. On April 3rd, the three countries signed an agreement to
promote a common Linux-based operating system to rival Microsoft in
computer software. They also agreed to work together to look into a
common standard for the next generation of mobile phones. More
broadly, one hears far fewer complaints in Japan these days about
rapid Chinese economic growth, since China is becoming an integral
part of Japan's supply chain and is now a big consumer of Japanese
wares.

None of this will alter the strategic wariness across the region, of
course. China is a fast-rising rival to the United States; Japan is
one of America's closest allies. Japan is under pressure to integrate
itself into an American missile-defence shield that China
opposes. North Korea has long had close ties with China; many Japanese
consider it the closest thing they have to an enemy. And Chinese
businessmen and political leaders are courting influence in South-East
Asia, where Japan once held much greater sway. Despite these
conflicts, however, North-East Asia is now one of the world's most
exciting economic areas. As growth, trade and investment lower
barriers in the region, it is only natural that these neighbours
should lean over the fence occasionally to chat.
