Changing minds 

Might the proper study of management be man?

Apr 15th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

A Harvard psychologist turns his mind to changing yours


Changing Minds: The Art and Science of Changing Our Own and Other
People's Minds
By Howard Gardner



Harvard Business School Press; 244 pages; $26.95

Buy it at
Amazon.com
Amazon.co.uk 
 
 

TH E of management is largely derivative: a mix of military strategy,
the economics of the firm and the engineering of processes. Less
frequently than it should, it takes ideas from the field of
psychology, and some of them have had considerable influence. The idea
that there are two distinct management styles, the authoritarian style
and the participative styleonsumers, Mr Kahneman studied the fuzzy way
in which people in their daily economic lives perceive things like
risk.

Two other influences may lie behind management's new-found enthusiasm
for the science of Freud and Jung. The turmoil at the turn of the
century, when stockmarkets' and businesses' fortunes rose and fell
like boats in a force eight gale, increased managers' awareness that
they live in a world that is not just ever-changing, but is changing
ever more quickly too . is a buzzword in management literature
today. Among other things, companies realise that they have to change,
frequently and radically, the attitudes and practices of much of their
workforce. For help they are turning to psychology.

The other influence comes from the spate of corporate scandals in
America and Europe, and the subsequent soul-searching about the
corruption of leadership. The study of leadership has, in the view of
many of its more traditional exponents, gon e. Out are the sturdy
reminders of how the likes of Alexander and Shackleton led their men
through impossible hardship; in are the exhortations to executives to
examine their inner selves . is the fashionable advice. 

A recent issue of the Harvard Business Review recommended that its
high-flying reader s. (It is assumed that the leaders of Enron, Tyco
and the like threw away their emotional compasses before they ever
came close to a boss's chair. ) the journal warned ,

Nobody is more skilled at sensing the management zeitgeist than the
Harvard Business School's publishing empire, an d came about when its
editorial director persuaded Harvard University's Howard Gardner, one
of the most influential psychologists of his generation, to turn his
thoughts to a business-related subject: the way that people, in the
workplace and elsewhere, can be persuaded to change their minds. 



The dark side of the mind
Mr Gardner is best known fo r, a book published in 1983 in which he
expounded the idea, now almost taken for granted by the American
educational establishment, that the mind is not a unidimensional
phenomenon whose development can be measured by a single IQ test. He
proposed that we hav e of them as arrows in a quive,r he says, ready
to be drawn upon in different combinations under different
circumstances. 

The author claims that Margaret Thatcher drew on resonance and
real-world events to change the minds of the British people in the
1980s; while Robert Shapiro, a lawyer who, as head of Monsanto, tried
to change the world's mind about genetically modified foods, failed
because h e that he encountered.

Mr Gardner presents the seven Re's as somethin g. But they seem to be
the fruits of his observation rather than the findings of more
thorough research. The subject has huge implications, hinted at when
Mr Gardner describes the fundamentalist as someone wh o. The son of
Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany, Mr Gardner is well aware that
Hitler was a peculiarly persuasive mind-changer. This subject is too
big and too dark to be served casually for the undemanding business
reader. 

