AIDS in India 

When silence is not golden

Apr 15th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Indians start voting next week to choose a new government. Its first
priority should be AIDS

Reuters 
 
 

 


Get article background

ONE subject not being discussed in India's current election campaign
is AIDS. Yet, on the most conservative of estimates, 600,000 Indians
already have the disease and 4.58m are infected with HIV, the virus
that causes it. That means India ranks second only to South Africa in
terms of its number of infectionssmall a scale. In two particular
respects, though, much more is needed: India's campaign needs more
money, and it needs stronger political commitment. The two are
related.

Nowhere has an AIDS epidemic been headed off without hefty
expenditure. Thailand spends roughly 55 cents per person on prevention
and treatment, Uganda $1.85, but India only about 17 cents. On the
face of it, India's money problem is being eased. International
agencies, the World Bank, bilateral donors and philanthropic
foundations have all pitched in with the promise of large sums. India
itself, though, has spent next to nothing. In part this reflects the
country's undoubted poverty, in part the low priority that the
government gives to health in general and AIDS in particular. In 2000
(the latest year for which comparative figures exist), India spent
only $71 per person on health, of which four-fifths was in the private
sector; indeed, on one measure government health spending was only $4
per person. India was one of only eight countries whose public-health
budget took less than 1% of GDP.

This indifference to public health shows up in other statistics. India
has more tuberculosis infections than any other countryan awkward
subject. India's is no exception. It may be the land of the Kama
Sutra, the land whose temples depict a licentiousness seldom shown in
public elsewhere. But it is also a land so prudish that its film
industry has only recently started to show kisses on screen. Defence
is easy by comparison. India spent 3.1% of GDP on defence in 2000. It
has nuclear weapons. It also has a space programme. It even offers
soft loans to African countries to help them fight AIDS. But it is
loth to launch an all-out programme to promote condoms. It prefers
instead to preach ABC his ministers and civil servants include a
message about AIDS in all their speeches and pronouncements, as the
chief minister of Andhra Pradesh already does. Public figures infected
with HIVlow-risk, notably teenagers and monogamous wives. Were it to
spread into the general population right across the country, as it has
in parts of Africa, the world would have a new pandemic of hideous
proportions. Fortunately, India has some advantages. It has a vast
information-technology industry and its health-management companies
and drug makers are capable of carrying out tests and providing cheap
drugs on a huge and as yet unexploited scale.

America's secretary of state, Colin Powell, said last week tha
t. India should listen. Time is not on the side of the
wishful-thinkers, the makers of false economies or those who think
AIDS is too unsavoury a subject for widespread public discussion. This
disease demands a lead from the top, and a commitment of public money
too. India cannot afford the alternative. 

