Trust me, I'm a banker

Apr 15th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

Banks have rediscovered the virtue of knowing their customers, writes
Patrick Lane

BUT for Fritz Vogt, Gammesfeld would be an unremarkable place,
scarcely worth a dot on the map. It's a pretty spot, but it won't keep
you long. If you allow yourself a stroll through the pristine
graveyard by the medieval church, you might need all of 15 minutes to
walk around it.

However, this village of 530 people in south-western Germany has a
claim to fame. Its bank, run by Mr Vogt size of deposit, and charges a
mere 4.0% for mortgages and 5.0% for other loans. No wonder the
balance sheet grew by 11% last year. Outsiders often ask to open
accounts, but are turned away: Gammesfelders only.

It would be easy to dismiss the Raiffeisenbank Gammesfeld as an
archaic throwback, kept going only by an old man's enthusiasm. Yet
many big banks are trying to recapture something that Mr Vogt, now 73,
has never lost: the human touch. He knows all his customers, which is
more than most bank managers can say these days. Sit in the bank for
half an hour, and you might imagine yourself in a corner
shop. Customers come in to a friendly welcome, chat while he counts
the cash and leave with a cheerful ade. Local knowledge also gives him
a fair idea of credit risk. Mr Vogt cannot recall any bad
debtsrything. Branches were out of fashion, because people and
buildings were thought to be too expensive. Customers were invited to
use ATMs and discouraged from bothering the staff: for a while Bank
One, an American bank, even charged for using human tellers. Customers
were encouraged to bank by telephoneelephones and computers are fine
for checking bank balances or making payments, and they can be
powerful ways of selling standardised financial products. Direct Line,
owned by Royal Bank of Scotland, has made a great success of selling
insurance by telephone; ING, a Dutch bank, is doing well with
telephone and internet savings accounts in several countries.

However, these technologies are much less good for selling products of
any complexity. Most people prefer to discuss mortgages, mutual funds
and so forth face-to-face. Moreover, banks these days want potential
customers to do more than open a new current account. They aim, in the
industry jargon, to maximise thei r by selling a whole portfolio of
services, ideally after a thorough review of all a customer's
financial affairs. People are much better at that than machines are.

In the United States, the number of bank branches has been on the
increase for several years, even though the number of banks has been
falling. Elsewhere, branch numbers are declining, but banks are
nevertheless beginning to rethink how branches should be used. They
are less inclined to whisk promising managers off to head office and
more willing to leave them in the field where they have direct contact
with customers.

More generally, many bankers now like to stress th e bit of retail
banking. Some talk eagerly about the lessons they have learned from
Wal-Mart. Others refer to themselves a s rather than bankers. The head
of retail at one British bank, HBOS, used to work for Asda, a
supermarket chain owned by Wal-Mart; the man in charge of branches at
Abbey, another British bank, came from Woolworths and spent many years
at Dixons, an electrical-goods retailer. Some banks have changed the
design of their branches to make them feel more like shops or
showrooms. Marketing emphasises nearness to the customer: Commerce
Bank, based in New Jersey, calls itsel f; HSBC claims to b e.

Much of this survey will explore this change in banking fashion. The
reasons for it are partly cyclical. Retail banking is less subject to
the ups and downs of the business cycle than wholesale or investment
banking. So it is no surprise that during America's recent economic
downturn and subsequent recovery banks with a strong retail business
did well, especially when low interest rates gave a huge boost to
mortgage refinancing and consumer borrowing. The profitability of
retail has in turn encouraged banks to invest more in their retail
operations.

The cycle may now be turning. Mortgage business slowed towards the end
of last year, and commercial and industrial lending are looking
brighter. Underwriting and mergers also seem to be picking up. Some
banks may have overdone the rush to build branches. Even so, the past
few years have reminded banks that retail is less risky than the more
glamorous bits of banking.

So some recent converts may pay more attention to retail in future
too. J.P. Morgan Chase cast its acquisition of Bank One, announced in
January, as a portfolio decision. Bank One increases the weight of
retail banking in J.P. Morgan's mix . explains David Coulter,
J.P. Morgan's head of investment banking. Those who have been
concentrating on retail for many years need no persuading . says
Richard Kovacevich, chief executive of Wells Fargo.

It also seems reasonable for banks to bet on steady growth in retail
finance. According to John Drzik of Mercer Oliver Wyman, a consulting
firm, there are two good reasons why the financial-services industry
worldwide can be expected to grow faster than GDP. First, the
proportion of income spent on financial services rises with
income. People put more money in the bank. They spend more on
insurance and on investment products. And they are willing to borrow
more, boosting the demand for consumer credit. 

Second, market liberalisation helps the industry. In freer economies
such as America, Australia and Britain, Mr Drzik reckons, financial
services account for perhaps 8-10% of GDP. In continental Europe,
their share is maybe 4-6%. In Asia, Tab Bowers, of McKinsey's Tokyo
office, expects that markets in personal financial services will grow
by $180 billion between 2001 and 2010. That is equivalent to the rise
in America's market between 1994 and 2001.

Already the past couple of years have been kind to banks in many
countries. America's banks, jittery in the previous downturn, came
through the recession of 2001 all but unscathed and saw profits surge
last year. In Britain, where the economy has been bonny, banks made so
much profit last year that they earned brickbats not plaudits from the
press. 

Even the world's laggards have something to smile about: in Japan,
there are signs that the country's banking system is beginning to mend
after a dozen awful years, and in Germany there is also evidence of
improvement. China's authorities have made a start on dealing with the
gargantuan bad debts of the country's four biggest banks. 

Broadly speaking, banks that supply financial services efficiently are
likely to be healthier than those that do not. It is no accident that
America and Britain, where banks have been largely free to go about
their business, have had sounder banking systems than Japan, in which
bank lending was influenced by the state, or Germany, where the public
sector looms large. 



Lubricating capitalism
However, banking is not just another industry. Banks have a special
economic function, recycling capital from savers to borrowers. The
health and profitability of banks matters not only to their
shareholders but to just about everybody else too. If banks foul up on
the allocation of capital, the results can be catastrophic. If a big
bank fails, the whole economy can seize up. That is why banks are
regulated differently from other businesses. In particular, they are
expected to maintain minimum capital standards, set out in an
international agreement, the Basel accord.

Nevertheless, even in recent years banks and their supervisors have
sometimes got things badly wrong. In the past decade, there have been
banking crises in Argentina, East Asia, Japan and the Nordic
countries; and in the 1980s and early 1990s, the savings-and-loan
crisis helped to bring down hundreds of American banks. Supervisors
are now revising the Basel accord in an effort to make banks and
economies safer. But they have their work cut out, as the next article
will show. 


