Israel and Palestine 

Out of Gaza

Apr 15th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Has George Bush betrayed Palestine by his concessions to Ariel Sharon? 
Reuters 
 
 

 
A GREAT wail of indignation from the Arab world greeted George Bush's
decision this week to endorse Ariel Sharon's plan to evacuate all of
the Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip. Of course a withdrawal is
good, say the Palestinians, but at what price? The Israeli prime
minister's transparent intention is to hold on all the more tightly
afterwards to Israel's much bigger settlements in the West Bank. And
instead of warning Mr Sharon that this would not be tolerated, Mr Bush
tilted American policy even further in Israel's direction. To help Mr
Sharon counter domestic critics of the Gaza evacuation, he showered
Israel with rewards. Foremost of these were a declaration that it
would b e in any final settlement for Israel to make a full and
complete return to its pre-1967 border; and that returning refugees
would have to make their homes in the new Palestine, not in Israel
proper.



The mythology, and the facts
On the face of it, and certainly from a Palestinian perspective, both
parts of Mr Bush's declaration look like a betrayal of basic
understandings about the road to peace. The Palestinians see th e of
the 700,000 or so refugees who fled or were forced out of their homes
in the 1948 war when Israel was created as just that: a right that
cannot be voided by anyone except the refugees themselves. They feel
the same way about the pre-1967 border. Indeed, conceding Israel's
right to live peacefully within these is regarded as a compromise in
itself, since it means that the Palestinians end up with about 20% of
historic Palestine, while the Israelis keep about 80% for
themselves. And wasn't Israel's return to the pre-1967 border the
central demand of Resolution 242, which was passed by the Security
Council at the end of the 1967 war, and has been the cornerstone of
regional diplomacy ever since? 

Well, maybe (though the framers of 242 envisaged minor border
changes). But as usual in the Middle East, things are more complicated
than they seem. Although requiring Israel's full return to the
pre-1967 border and the refugees' return to former homes in Israel
proper are indeed part of the Palestinians' negotiating mythology,
neither demand is taken seriously by serious peacemakers, including by
the Palestinians themselves. And their moral claim depends on
airbrushing out bothersome details, such as their own refusal for many
years to accept 242 and drop their call for Israel's extinction. 

In the talks between Israel and Yasser Arafat initiated by Bill
Clinton in 2000, the Palestinian side accepted that Israel could not
be expected to uproot all of the big settlement blocks it has built in
occupied territory. Palestinian negotiators therefore agreed that
Israel would retain some of the bigger ones, in return for
compensating land swaps. Palestinian leaders also know that insisting
on the return of the refugees would destroy any conceivable deal. The
progeny of the 1948 refugees are now in their millions. Should a lot
of them exercise a right to return, Israel would in short order lose
its Jewish majority. And if there is one thing on which all Israelis
are immovable and united, it is that they insist on a Jewish
majority. 

Mr Bush is not the first American president to say these things out
loud. After the failure of his Camp David summit in 2000, Mr Clinton
suggested the need for similar compromises. But was Mr Bush right to
repeat them right now, when no meaningful negotiations are taking
place between the two sides and he looks as though he is prejudicing
what will be decided when they eventually do sit down to talk?

Up to a point he was. Without Mr Bush's help, Mr Sharon would stand
little chance of withdrawing from the Gaza Strip in the teeth of
furious opposition from the settler movement and the right wing of his
own government. And Israel's withdrawal from Gaza is a potentially
huge prize for the Palestinians, one for which they have not had to
make any concession in return. That is probably the best that can be
achieved for as long as the intifada rages and while Mr Arafat cannot
or will not impose a ceasefire. In the meantime, Mr Bush insists that
th e, along with its vision of an independent Palestine in both the
West Bank and Gaza, still stands. 

In giving Mr Sharon what he asked for in return for Gaza, Mr Bush
accepted one sort of reality. What he cannot now risk doing is
ignoring another: that only a negotiated deal has a chance of bringing
lasting peace to the two sides, and that it is still only the United
States that has the ability to bring such a negotiation about. With
the setbacks in Iraq, America's own standing in the Muslim world is
beginning to depend on delivering much more in Palestine. 

