George Bush makes his case 

Something of a quagmire at home

Apr 15th 2004 | WASHINGTON, DC 
From The Economist print edition


EPA 
 
 

 

The president's position is not as bad as it first appearsoldest
clichi in the book to stay the course (whatever it is).

Mr Bush did reasonably well. All the same, the aim of the press
conference, only the third of his presidency and the first of any kind
this year, was damage limitation. It took place at a time when he has
been buffeted by an outbreak of civil disobedience in Iraq and an
outbreak of questioning at the September 11th commission.

Both have been taking a toll on his public standing. His job approval,
according to a Pew Research Centre study last week, fell to 43%, the
lowest point of his presidency. Even if other more recent polls have
shown him closer to 50%, the only incumbent with an approval around
that mark at this stage of an election was Gerald Ford, who lost.

Yet public opinion on Iraq and September 11th him, if only because
their opinion of the Clinton administration's record is even
dimmer. For Mr Bush, the real worry is the deterioration of popular
backing for the Iraq war. But this, while hurting him, is only slowly
translating into support for his Democratic rival, John Kerry.

That sanguine view of the president's record before September 11th may
seem odd. In a recent CBS poll, 72% of respondents thought that the
administration had not paid enough attention to the terrorist threat
in its first eight months and had spent too much time obsessing about
things like missile defence. Just 17% agreed with the administration's
claim to have taken the threat of global terrorism seriously. After
Condoleezza Rice's testimony to the September 11th commission, the
share rose a bit, but only to 25%.

Moreover, the national security adviser's testimony gave support to
the argument that the administration had failed to appreciate the
threat of unconventional terrorism partly because of the way in which
it operated. As David Broder of the Washington Post pointed out, she
painted a picture of a decision-making process proceeding in a rigidly
hierarchical, orderly fashion. Studies were delegated to the
appropriate level, two-page memos were prepared; eventually a
high-level meeting adopted a decision1th, 24% blamed his predecessor
more, and 39% blamed both. 

The refusal to point fingersor in Iraq is vital to the defeat of
violence and terror elsewher.e

Mr Bush can expect some reinforcement for that message from Tony
Blair, who was due to arrive in Washington, DC, just after The
Economist went to press. But the White House is also nervously
awaiting the publication this weekend of a new book by Bob Woodward of
the Washington Post about the administration's path to war in Iraq. It
seems likely to add more fuel to the debate about whether Mr Bush was
overly obsessed with Saddam Hussein.

For the past few weeks, the erosion of public confidence in the Iraq
war has not had large knock-on effects. That is, it only modestly
affected Mr Bush's reputation in handling the wider war on terror. And
it has not given a significant boost to Mr Kerry, who, after a brief
period of high popularity after his triumphs in the Democratic
primaries, has lagged behind the president. Now, both are changing.

Approval of the president for his handling of the war on terror is
still higher than almost any other indicator of his standing (58% in
the CBS poll, 59% in Newsweek). But that is significantly lower than
at the start of the year. And the various surveys that match up Messrs
Bush and Kerry now show the president has lost his lead. Some polls of
registered voters show Mr Kerry up to seven points ahead, outside the
margin of error. 

Given the problems in Iraq, and the big slide in Mr Bush's popularity
on other measures, it is perhaps surprising that he is holding up even
this well gloomy evidence for Democrats that worries about national
security do not necessarily translate into votes for Mr Kerry. Yet a
month ago, Republicans were pointing that out with a great deal more
confidence.

Mr Bush's standing is now evenly poised. It has weathered weeks of bad
news. Weeks more could send it spiralling downwards. 

