Israel's pull-out from Gaza 

Aren't we good, Mr President?

Apr 15th 2004 | JERUSALEM 
From The Economist print edition


Ariel Sharon gets a lot of what he wants from George Bush

Get article background

WHEN last December Ariel Sharon announced his plan for Israel's
unilatera l from the Gaza Strip, many chose to be sceptical. Some
suggested that it was merely a blocking tactic, designed to pre-empt
any international move to solve the lethal Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Others argued that promising to give up Gaza, with all its
troubles, was little more than diverting attention from the more
important West Bank. 

But Israel's prime minister stuck to his guns. His military planners
have quietly let it be known that there are tentative plans to start
uprooting the two dozen or so Israeli settlements (housing the 7,000
settlers who make life even more crowded for the 1.2m Palestinians)
much earlier than the original plans for next year. And this week Mr
Sharon was in Washington to get George Bush's blessing for his
determination to bring Israel's 36-year occupation of Gaza to an end.


Solid American support for the disengagement plan is thought crucial
to Mr Sharon's success in getting it agreed to in a referendum of his
Likud party's 200,000 members. He has said he will go with the
members' decision, but hardliners oppose the plan, and the numbers are
believed to be fairly evenly divided. The referendum will now take
place on May 2ndls of the European club basketball championships in
Tel Aviv.

In particular, Mr Sharon was anxious that the American administration
accept Israel's right t othe needs of the Palestinian refugees would
have to be met within the new Palestine rather than Israel proper. And
while promising not to jeopardise the outcome of any future drawing of
borders between the two sides, he said that in light of new realities
on the ground ,, it wa s to expect the outcome of such talks to b e

Reuters 
 
 
Young Israelis learn from their neighbours
 
The Palestinian Authority expressed outrage. A furious Yasser Arafat
reiterated from Ramallah on the West Bank the Palestinians' right to
return to thei r inside Israel. Ahmed Qurei, the PA's prime minister,
said that Mr Bush was the first American president to have legitimised
Israel's settlements in the occupied territories, and that this was
unacceptable. Some reports said he was pondering resignation. Kofi
Annan, the UN's secretary-general, also voiced reservations,
expressing his preference for a negotiated agreement based on UN
resolutions, rather than unilateral steps. But negotiations between
Israel and the PA have so far been stuck at the first fence, by the
Israelis' refusal to talk to Mr Arafat, whom they accuse of conniving
in terrorism, and the PA's inability, or unwillingness, to impose the
ceasefire called for in the internationa l.

Mr Sharon's visit to Mr Bush was sandwiched between visits by Egypt's
Hosni Mubarak and Jordan's King Abdullah. With Arab allies in mind, Mr
Bush is anxious to demonstrate that Israel's unilateral withdrawal
from Gaza is not inconsistent with the larger plans of the road
map. The Arab world has doubts about this. But, enforcing the belief
that the Gaza pull-out will not remain the end of a beginning, Yoel
Marcus, a leading Israeli columnist, wrote :


