University fundraising 

Grotty givens

Apr 15th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Universities' fundraising woes reflect the clash of hope against
reality
 
 
 

 
WHY are Britain's needy universities so bad at fundraising? Oxford and
its colleges pull in around #65m ($118m) a year to add to an endowment
conservatively valued at around #2 billion. That is riches by British
standards but less than a quarter of Harvard's $558m haul last year on
top of an endowment of close to $20 billion. At King's College London,
one of Britain's top dozen universities, the five-year fundraising
target is a paltry #44m.

Reasons for this include fewer rich people in Britain, no big recent
tradition of philanthropy, and a social convention that asking
directly for money counts as boorish. A bigger problem, though, is the
government. Although tax treatment of charitable giving is similar on
both sides of the Atlantic, university finance isn't. British
universities are largely state-financed, and state-run. Donors shy
away from any risk that their generosity will just make up for
government shortfallsersities themselves. The vice-chancellors who run
them are ill suited (sometimes literally) to schmoozing
millionaires. Compared with America's armies of fundraisers, the
British efforts are tinyssionally, the British record is more
mixed. University administrators tend to like new buildings; donors
may be more interested in supporting bright but needy students. 

To be fair, British universities are still learning, having begun
serious fundraising only in the 1990s. One idea is to recruit more
experienced staff from charities and the arts world, says Rebecca
Williams, development director at King's. Warwick and the London
School of Economics have both hired fundraisers from across the
Atlantic. Cambridge has high hopes for its new vice-chancellor, Alison
Richard, poached from Yale. Americans are in overall charge of London
Business School, Warwick and (come September) King's. Oxford has a
ten-person development office in New York and rotates British staff
through American training courses. 

But the sneaking suspicion is that good fundraising is a symptom of
success, not its cause. If so, Britain's tatty universities and
demoralised dons may have a long wait for the hoped-for megabucks.
