Iraq 

Another intifada in the making

Apr 15th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Having stepped to the brink, America would be wise to step back
Getty Images 
 
 

 
IT IS quite plain what has gone wrong. The Americans are trying to
foist democracy too quickly on a country that has no experience of
it. Unless, that is, they are foisting it too slowly. They paid too
much attention to the Shias and neglected the Sunnis. Or maybe they
took the Shias for granted. They are too quick to use force; they
should have acted forcefully sooner to nip the insurgency in the
bud. At any rate, the way out of this pickle is obvious: speed up/slow
down the transfer of sovereignty, hand over to the United Nations (or
should that be NATO?), hold elections/give up the illusion that
elections can solve anything in the Arab world. And, of course,
America should not have started from here. 

To George Bush, who has paid so generously with his soldiers' lives
and voters' taxes for the liberation and rebuilding of Iraq, the past
week's cacophony of unsolicited advice and unstinting criticism must
be more than exasperating. Much of the advice is contradictory and
much of the criticism self-interested. But the critics cannot be
accused of exaggerating the seriousness of what is now happening in
Iraq. 

It is true, as the spokesmen of the American-led coalition insist,
that the separate uprisings of Sunnis in Fallujah west of Baghdad, and
of Shias rallying in the south to the banner of a junior cleric,
Muqtada al-Sadr, do not add up to a general intifada against the
Americans. A silent majority of Iraqis may well understand that they
have much more to gain from a peaceful transition to self-government
that is managed by the United States and lubricated by American
dollars. The trouble is that a majority that remains silent is liable
to have less influence on events than a minority that takes up the
gun. 

The past fortnight has shown that a shocking number of Iraqis are
indeed willing to take up the gun, and that most of the Iraqi
policemen and soldiers recruited since the fall of Saddam Hussein
prefer to lay theirs down than to fire on fellow citizens. This has
left the job of pacifying Fallujah and other restive parts of Iraq to
an American army that is stretched too thin and shows every sign of
having reacted with excessive force. By some estimates the Americans
have over the past fortnight killed 500 or so Iraqis in
Fallujah. Slaughter on this scale cannot credibly be described as a
policing operation designed to rid Fallujah of criminals and
terrorists (see article). 

An American attempt to carry out its promise to kill or capture Mr
Sadr, protected by a passionate militia in the holy city of Najaf,
could be bloodier still. Indeed, the danger that the Americans will
unwittingly spark a general uprising by trying to put down the local
ones is all too real. Even now, Iraq shows signs of slipping beyond
the capacity of outsiders to help it. The country cannot be restored
to prosperity if it is unsafe even for American army convoys to travel
on the main roads, and while every foreign journalist, driver and aid
worker is in danger of being kidnapped or worse. Many foreign
governments have ordered their nationals out. 



The awful consequences of failure
Mr Bush likes to assert that an American failure in Iraq is
unimaginable. This, unfortunately, is not the case. What is true is
that the disastrous consequences of such a failure would extend beyond
Iraq itself. Instead of offering an inspiring example to its
neighbours, an Iraq that spiralled into further violence would confirm
the suspicion of Arabs in general that America is an enemy of
Islam. Arabs in Iraq and beyond already make the false but damaging
comparison between America in Iraq and Israel in the West Bank and
Gaza. 

How to retrieve the situation? The best hope in Iraq is that America's
tough talk against the rebels of Fallujah and Mr Sadr in Najaf is a
bluff designed to incentivise its foes in both places to negotiate
their way out of a showdown. Though at midweek Mr Sadr denied talking
to the occupiers, mediators seem active behind the scenes. Best of all
would be a signal from Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistani, the Shias'
paramount spiritual leader, that the Shia mainstream disapproves of Mr
Sadr's antics. But for that the coalition may need to strike some
face- (and life-) saving deal with Mr Sadr. As a rule, it is a pity to
let armed groups defy authority and get away with it. But Iraq is
hardly a normal place right now, and Mr Sadr's is only one of many
armed militias. Better, if possible, to co-opt such an enemy than risk
a wider conflagration by killing him in a shrine. 

Elsewhere in the Middle East, Mr Bush must not allow his Iraqi woes to
continue to distract him from the need to make progress in
Palestine. He made at best a quarter-step this week by embracing Ariel
Sharon's plan to withdraw unilaterally from the Gaza Strip and
evacuate the Jewish settlements there, as well as a few isolated ones
in the West Bank. But this, as another leader argues, is not going to
be enough to persuade his Arab critics that he is serious about a
wider peace.

