Iraq 

The centre holds, but only just

Apr 15th 2004 | BAGHDAD 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

The recent violence has shed light on who really speaks for Iraqis

FOR Baghdadis, April 2004 has had eerie echoes of April 2003. The
streets emptied; children stayed away from school. In scrappy street
battles around the country, more than 90 coalition troops have died
this month, making it the deadliest for the Americans since the fall
of Saddam Hussein. And just as Saddam's army melted away from the
battlefields, so Iraq's new security forces fled at the first gunshot
rather than fight for the Americans against their rebellious
compatriots. 

Had the battles raged for more than a week, the revolt might have spun
out of control. America stirred up trouble when it attacked the Sunni
Muslim stronghold of Fallujah, threatening to turn not only Fallujans
into rebels, but also their tribal affiliates as far north as
Mosul. At the same time, the American assault on a militia led by
Muqtada al-Sadr, a Shia firebrand who has urged Iraqis to rise up
against the occupation, risked goading southern Shias. While the
rebels gathered support, America's coalition in Iraq started to look
wobbly. Ukrainian soldiers fled their positions. The
American-appointed Governing Council pondered resigning en masse. It
was, admitted the coalition's military leaders, their worst week since
entering Iraq. 

But somehow, the country has pulled back from the brink. The Governing
Council decided not to quit after all, and showed rare pluck in
persuading the belligerents to stop shooting. The Iraqi Islamic
Partynstead of demanding the surrender of all those who took part in
the hanging, drawing and mutilating of four American military
contractors at the end of last month, the generals are calling for the
handover of the non-Iraqi jihadis they say are holed up in Najaf. The
rebels, meanwhile, have dropped their demand for a full withdrawal of
American troops from Iraq, and now say they just want them out of
their own cities.

The conflict may have abated, but its causes have not. Ten weeks
before the planned handover of power to Iraqis on June 30th, Mr Bremer
has yet to spell out what kind of government he will install. He has
recently tended to ignore the Governing Council, for example when
appointing a new interior minister. Sensing a political vacuum,
various factions, including those led by members of the Council, are
building up their own militiascommand the loyalty of millions of
Sunnis, are creating a military wing. The only Iraqi brigade to fight
on America's side this month was one composed of Kurdish peshmergas
and the Free Iraq Forces of Ahmed Chalabi, a member of the Governing
Council.



A resistible force
The national police and army, meanwhile, are looking feeble. The few
who have returned to the towns they fled have shed their uniforms,
after receiving leaflets warning them not to serve the occupation. The
militants in both Fallujah and Najaf insist that only
locally-recruited police should be allowed to patrol their
streets. Locals will most likely obey local politicians, rather than
the Americans, so these two hotspots will doubtless remain hot. After
retaking Kut, another town briefly controlled by Mr Sadr's militia,
the Americans imposed a curfew that pointedly included the town's
police. 

The coalition's supply lines remain dangerously exposed. The charred
remains of fuel, food and military convoys litter the highways into
Baghdad. Truck drivers are either too scared to work for the
Americans, or charge exorbitant rates. The kidnapping of over 40
foreigners has shattered investor confidence and grounded expatriate
managers, just after $5 billion in reconstruction contracts were
awarded. The violence interrupts the restoration of basic services to
Iraqis, which begets discontent, which may beget more violence. 

Is there a way out? Optimists argue that the bloodshed must have
concentrated minds. It has given America a better idea of which Iraqis
wield real influence. Most members of the Governing Council bleated
from the sidelines during the fighting, but a few won popular
credibility by acting as mediators or organising relief
programmes. The groups that showed the most gumption include Mr
Jaffari's Dawa party and Mohsen Abdel Hamid's Iraqi Islamic Party,
which is backed by some Sunni preachers. The ayatollahs in Najaf, led
by Ali Sistani, have sent their sons to soothe Mr Sadr, only to hear
Mr Sadr's aides brand them American spies. 

This month's unrest has also spurred America to talk to Iraqis with
local constituencies, rather than the exiles it had previously
appointed to govern. Many of the local leaders are anti-American and
religious chauvinists. But Mr Bremer will have to find ways to co-opt
them. His advisers say he is working on a final draft of 125 names for
a National Assembly, which will be summoned next week to begin
choosing Iraq's post-occupation government. He would be wise to ensure
that hitherto marginalised groups, such as the Sunnis of Fallujah and
the impoverished Shias who support Mr Sadr, are represented.


