Southern culture 

Left Behind, but not forgotten

Apr 15th 2004 | BOSSIER CITY, LOUISIANA 
From The Economist print edition


Who needs Mel Gibson anyway?

IT IS Sunday afternoon in Bossier City and a lengthy line of fans
holding books snakes around the Wal-Mart Supercentre, past NASCAR
fishing reels, tyres, plastic dishes, and facial creams. Some 200
middle-class, middle-aged white people, some still dressed in their
church clothes, buzz with an excitement that rivals teens awaiting a
Justin Timberlake concert.

AP 
 
 
LaHaye and Jenkins burn through Bossier
 
They have come to this corner of Louisiana to see the authors o fd
attends church weekly. 

In many other countries, this would not translate into big sales. Yet
the series has sold 40m copies in barely a decade; add in the spin-off
books for children and that number exceeds 60m. The authors recently
launched two new series of Left Behind military and political books
written by up-and-coming Christian authors. Then, there are calendars,
audiotapes, study guides and videos. Borrowing a trick fro m, the
authors now plan to write two new series, to serve as sequels and
prequels to the Left Behind books. 

The success of Mel Gibson's film on the Passion should have come as no
surprise to anybody who has followed the success of the Left Behind
series. Mr LaHaye, a minister and the commercial mastermind, and Mr
Jenkins, who does most of the writing, published the first instalment
in 1995 through a small Chicago publisherook ,, reached the top of the
New York Times bestseller list, 75% of sales were in secular,
mainstream outlets. Wal-Mart has done particularly well out of the
books, as it has out of other conservative tomes.

Cynics may carp about their prose style; but the books cleverly blend
pulp fiction with scripture and they have struck a chord in uncertain
times. People in the queue at Wal-Mart said that Mr LaHaye, a prophecy
scholar, has been blessed with the voice of God whispered into his ear
just as they believe that George Bush was ordained by God to serve as
president. 

People still talk reverently about the moment when Air Force One
landed at nearby Barksdale on September 11th 2001, for Mr Bush to
address the nation after the terrorist attacks. It is rather hard to
imagine John Kerry picking up many votes from Left Behind readers.

