Romania and the EU 

Don't count your chickens 

Apr 15th 2004 | BUCHAREST 
From The Economist print edition


2007 may be too early an entry date for a big, poor country

THERE is a public clock in the centre of Romania's capital that counts
the days until 2007ows? There is n o to cope with failure, say
officials, almost proudly. That strategy may sound risky, but it has
advantages. Romania's government has enough on its plate striving for
success in 2007 (a date also held out to Bulgaria), without having to
plot alternative strategies too.

The EU's requirements, swallowed whole, offer the government a
ready-made programme. The need to fulfil it will provide a persuasive
argument for keeping the ruling Social Democratic Party in power at
the general election which is due in November.

Romania's pantomime of optimism deters EU officials and visiting
politicians from questioning its ambitions, at least publicly. The
only blunter message has come from the European Parliament, which said
last month that Romania's accession in 2007 would be impossible unless
it tackled such issues as corruption, a lack of judicial independence,
harassment of the media and police brutality.

The parliament said Romania's social security syste m to help larger
families, and called food safet y. But that row subsided, amid
Romanian promises to improve. The European Commission still says
negotiations can be concluded in time for a treaty by the end of 2005,
and for accession in 2007. Romania wants the negotiations concluded by
the end of this year, but that looks unlikely. Even the completion of
negotiations would not mean that Romania wa s to join the EU in any
strict sense. Nobody thinks this poor, sprawling country, whose income
per person is 10% of the EU average, will have an efficient
government, decent judges, a sophisticated market economy and mastery
of EU law by 2005, nor even by 2007.

The idea is more that the negotiations might be deemed complete, if
the EU is in an indulgent mood, once Romania has got laws and
programmes in place to attack the worst of its failings, and has
earmarked enough money for the years ahead to ensure that in practice
things do move securely in the right direction.

Modernising Romania's legal system will mean recruiting and training
about 1,500 judges, and the principles of judicial independence must
be drummed into both judges and politiciansulists. Why shouldn't
Romania have similar indulgence?

One answer may be that, after struggling to digest so many
ill-equipped countries this year, the EU will be in no hurry to repeat
the experience. Early clashes with Poland have brought home the risks
of letting a big but very needy country into the EU: it becomes
aggressive and defensive, fearing that others will take advantage of
its weakness. Romania might follow suit. If the admission of Romania
in 2007 comes to look too daunting, the EU can slow the negotiations,
raising questions and doubts until the moment for signing the
accession treaty passes. (It would have to decide then whether to set
back the admission of Bulgaria also.) Romania and the EU should think
more more about this possible outcome. Delaying the next enlargement
until, say, 2009, would give Romania more time to complete badly
needed reforms. Fears that this might backfire, by demoralising
Romania so much that its reforms unravelled, are probably misplacedere
offered as a firm promise.

For the Romanian government, a delay might even be welcome, so long as
it became known only after November's election. The ruling Social
Democrats will campaign as the party capable of assuring EU entry. If
the date then slips to 2009, they can campaign on the same platform
when the next election comes round in 2008. But a botched accession in
2007 would make the 2008 election very sticky. If the centre-right
opposition wins this year's election, it should be happier still. It
will get no blame for the deferral and will win time for reforms. The
clock can be reset, without wrecking the mechanism. 

