Digital Devide

Beyond the digital divide

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Development: Amid much worthy talk o f, technology firms have realised
that fostering the adoption of information technology in the
developing world would not just benefit locals, but is in vendors'
best interests as well

AFP 
 
 
Aggregated buying power in action
 


THE gleaming Indian headquarters of Hewlett-Packard, an American
computing giant, are testament to India's technology-led boom. The
glass-panelled tower, located on a busy Bangalore thoroughfare, swarms
with a new breed of well-heeled urban professionals. But inside the
building, in a warren of cubicles on the second floor, a rather
different customer is being targeted. Engineers and programmers at HP
Labs, the company's research arm, are working on low-cost devices for
the three-quarters of Indians who still live in the countryside. In
one room, a cheap e-mail device that allows messages to be sent in
local languages is on display; in another sits a tablet-shaped PC that
lets users fill out government forms in Indian scripts.

These technologies are part of HP's ambitious plans to sell to the 4
billion poorest people at the bottom of the global economic
pyramid. In addition to work being done at the HP Labs, the company
has also invested resources in it s initiative, a project designed to
set u p an d around the worldvestments. Several centresell
airtime. And the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) in Chennai
recently unveiled a stripped-down cash-dispenser that it plans to take
to the masses in partnership with private-sector banks. 

Of course, the idea that the poor constitute an untapped market is
hardly new. Hindustan Lever, a subsidiary of Unilever, pioneered the
idea years ago, marketing its shampoos and detergents in single-use
sachets rather than larger (and more expensive) bottles. But the
increasing ubiquityrd Business Review in 2002, C. K. Prahalad of the
University of Michigan and Allen Hammond of the World Resources
Institute, an environmental think-tank, pointed out that the
collective buying power of the poor in Rio de Janeiro is $1.2
billion. Ashok Jhunjhunwala of IIT-Chennai, who has been instrumental
in bringing several technologies to rural markets, points out that
there are 600,000 villages in India alone . he says. 

While such numbers are indeed striking, and heartening to would-be
rural entrepreneurs, the challenge lies in the implementation. Mike
Best of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who has worked in
rural markets in Africa and Asia, points out that many developing
countries (he cites Ghana as an example) lack the requisite
connectivity. In addition, aggregated demand in, say, Madagascar, with
a population of 17m, is unlikely to yield the same economies of scale
as in India. And with its multitude of languages and cultures, even
India poses difficulties. 

Some of the difficulties may have technical solutions. To deal with
the problem of multiple languages, HP is devising
character-recognition systems capable of recognising a variety of
scripts. The engineers at IIT-Chennai are implementing a
fingerprint-recognition system in their cash dispensersthat would save
the (often illiterate) villagers from having to remember a personal
identification number.

But perhaps the best reason to be optimistic is that the companies in
question are driven by a powerful motivator that is lacking in
donor-led rural programmes: profit. Mr Tawker, for example, happily
characterises HP's efforts as a long-term strategic response to
saturation and slower growth in the company's traditional
markets. Now, the technologists just have to devise the technological
equivalent of shampoo sachets. 


