An African peacekeeping force 

How to put the house in order

Mar 11th 2004 | JOHANNESBURG 
From The Economist print edition


Perhaps Africa can at last start to deal with Africa's wars
Reuters 
 
 
South Africans already keeping the peace
 
Get article background

TWO years ago South Africa's President Thabo Mbeki called for an
African army that might help bring the continent's civil wars under
control, prevent genocide and in general make Africa a calmer
place. Let a Peace and Security Council (modelled on the UN's top
body) oversee it, he said. The next time a tragedy loomed, such as the
1994 genocide in Rwanda, the continent could do more than watch in
horror. No longer would Africa have to call for outside help from
Britain, France or America to end its awful wars.

Remarkably, what seemed just a nice idea may become reality. By the
end of last year 28 countries had ratified a protocol bringing an
African Security Council into existence. This month foreign ministers
meeting in Ethiopia will elect its 15 members for terms of three to
five years. By next year the council may have an army to
command. Leaders of the African Union agreed last weekend to form five
brigades of soldiers, policemen and military observers, 15,000 people
in all, to be led by South Africa, Nigeria, Kenya and Egypt. There
will be one brigade in each of five regions of the continent. Luckily,
a barmy idea by Libya's President Muammar Qaddafi to scrap all
national armies and form a single pan-African one was rejected.

This is not all. Five eminent Africans will form  a which is supposed
to help prevent and resolve conflicts. A military committee will plan
operations, just as military advisers help the UN's peacekeeping
department. A n is supposed to tell officials when a war is
looming. Malawi's President Bakili Muluzi suggests that a first test
could be tackling the Lord's Resistance Army, a vicious Ugandan rebel
group.

But it is likely to be years before real operations begin. Some money
may be drawn from a European Union fund of 250m ($300m); Scandinavian
countries could train the peacekeepers; the United States may train
soldiers for tougher operations, as it has in Nigeria. But donors are
wary. They want assurances that their money will flow into an
efficient system.

African countries must also prove they can provide well-trained and
properly equipped troops. South Africa has some 3,000 peacekeepers in
Burundi and Congo-Kinshasa; Namibian soldiers are part of the UN
operation in Liberia; Nigeria's army has tried to keep order in parts
of west Africa. But others are less reliable. Ethiopia, Mozambique,
Ghana and Senegal all promised peacekeepers for Burundi, who came
either late or not at all. Zambian soldiers meant to dampen Sierra
Leone's civil war arrived without boots or guns and were promptly
taken hostage by a rebel army.

The new Security Council, which can order military intervention
anywhere in Africa, will also have to ensure that nobody hijacks
it. An existing southern African body, the Organ on Politics, Defence
and Security, was taken over in 1998 by its then chairman, Robert
Mugabe of Zimbabwe, which then joined Namibia and Angola in a war of
plunder in Congo under the cover o f, despite objections from South
Africa and others. 



