Pakistan 

The man in the middle

Mar 11th 2004 | ISLAMABAD 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

One of America's most important partners in the war against terror,
Pakistan is also one of its biggest worries

Get article background

AS AN American ally, Pakistan is an embarrassment. Its ruler, General
Pervez Musharraf, seized power in a bloodless coup in 1999. His
efforts since then to legitimise himself have been marred by a
farcical referendum, electoral manipulation, and concessions to
Pakistan's Islamist extremists. The country has been the launch-pad
for terrorist attacks in India. Worse still, it has proved to be the
headquarters of a global mail-order business in nuclear-bomb
technology, with Libya, Iran and North Korea as its known
customers. If not a member of George Bush' s, Pakistan seems to have
been doing its best to meet the eligibility criteria.

So when Colin Powell, America's secretary of state, visits Pakistan on
March 17th, he will have some harsh words for his hosts. But only in
private. Since September 11th 2001, Pakistan has been an irreplaceable
American partner. Its airspace and logistical support were essential
for the war against the Taliban in Afghanistan in late 2001. Its
co-operation remains vital to the continuing hunt for Mullah Omar, the
Taliban's leader, and for Osama bin Laden. In an operation now under
way in the remote and lawless areas along the Pakistan-Afghan border,
Pakistani soldiers are trying to drive al-Qaeda remnants into the arms
of their American allies.

America and Pakistan have strongly denied reports of an explicit deal
to allow American troops to operate from Pakistan in return for a
lenient approach to Pakistan's proliferation sins. But November's
presidential election makes catching Mr bin Laden an ever more
important symbolic moment in th eence services, and its human-rights
record remained poor. The next day, Mr Powell appeared before Congress
to justify the department's budget for the coming year, including $5.7
billion in assistance for countrie s. Top of the list, with $700m, was
Pakistan.



Here comes the hero
Behind America's willingness to tolerate Pakistan's undemocratic ways
lies the hope that, under General Musharraf, it can deliver not just
al-Qaeda fugitives, but stability in the world's only nuclear-armed
Islamic Republic. A reminder that Pakistan will not easily relinquish
that status came this week when it tested a new missile capable of
carrying nuclear warheads to most Indian cities. The fear is that the
country might lurch into Islamist extremism, and its nuclear
technology fall into even more dangerous hands. This gives rise to a
paradox: that the army, the bastion against the fundamentalist threat,
has an interest in keeping that threat alive.

The general is supposed to be the man who can resolve these
contradictions, as indispensable to Pakistan's future as Pakistan is
to America's fight against terrorism. In this version of the story, he
plays the hero: paving the way for full restoration of democracy,
stemming the slide into Islamic fundamentalism, plugging the leaks in
the country's nuclear-technology apparatus, and reaching an historic
peace with the old enemy, India.

Attempts on his life have helped foster this image. Would-be assassins
last December included two suicide bombershat Pakistan's president may
be a better partner in peace talks than any likely replacement. Atal
Behari Vajpayee, India's prime minister, has expressed concern for his
safety. 



Four dangerous perceptions
While acknowledging that he is taking big political and personal
risks, many Pakistanis take a less charitable view of General
Musharraf. They see him as just the latest in a line of Pakistani
soldiers to grow weary of the uncertainties of the democratic process,
and to override it. Like one such predecessor, General Zia ul Haq, who
ruled from 1977 to 1988, General Musharraf has bolstered his position
at home by building up the country's small but passionate extremist
Islamist fringe. Yet, to justify his dictatorship to the Americans, he
points to the threat posed by these very same Islamists.

This secular, democratic general, photographed cuddling pooches, and
said to be partial to a peg of whisky, seems at times more popular
with the mullahs than the politicians. On January 17th, he made an
inspirational speech to a joint session of the two houses of
parliament. Noting that Pakistan's Islamic Republic was perceived
overseas a s, he called for  a. His speech was almost drowned out by
the barracking of elected parliamentarians. A month later, undaunted,
he took the same message to an even more forbidding audienceole
world. Their provision of money, training and cannon-fodder for the
14-year insurrection against Indian rule in Kashmir brought misery to
that land, put Pakistan on the wrong side in the war against terror,
and utterly failed in its objectives.

Curiously, General Musharraf seems to share Mr Hoodhbhoy's
analysis. Amid the cat-calls in parliament he was citing the very same
three issues, along with Islamic extremism, a s to which Pakistan is
subject. Correcting them, he suggested, migh t, and he suggested
remedies. Many Pakistanis, however, doubt his seriousness in pursuing
these remedies. They see an astute political tactician, who has yet to
take the strategic decision to abandon failed policies.

On Afghanistan, the president promised parliament  a. Pakistan is
credited with doing much to root out al-Qaeda fugitives, both from its
wild fringes and from the cities where some have hidden among the
multitudes. But it has done less to help wipe out the vestiges of the
Taliban. 

That is perhaps not surprising. The Afghan fundamentalists were, after
all, nurtured by Pakistan's spooks, the Inter-Services Intelligence
(ISI), and retain much sympathy among their Pushtun ethnic kin across
the porous border. But there are also suspicions that Pakistan is
playing a double game in Afghanistan, helping the Taliban to survive
to insure against the emergence of an unfriendly regime in Kabul. 

In 2001, when General Musharraf dumped the Taliban in favour of
America, there was speculation that the switch would provoke such
anger among Pakistan's Islamists that he might be swept from
power. There were indeed some large and unruly protests, but none that
came near to mounting such a challenge. 

Similarly this year, the general weathered another storm: the public
humiliation of a great national hero, Abdul Qadeer Khan. The exposure
of Mr Khan, a metallurgist, as the hub of a network of
nuclear-technology proliferation has left many seeing him as a
fall-guy for crimes that could not have been committed without the
knowledge of the army top brass. But his televised confession did at
least give General Musharraf a prop on which to rest his denials. Some
Pakistanis joke that Mr Khan, who brought Pakistan the bomb and so
ensured its survival alongside a hostile neighbour, India, has, by
taking the rap, saved the country for a second time.

He also saved himself. In deference to the scientist's enormous
prestige, the president let him off scot-free( ). Remarkably, the
American and British governments, in public at least, were happy to
treat this as an internal Pakistani affair. Just as remarkable to some
observers was the muted reaction in Pakistan to the debunking of a
national icon. Strikes called in his support soon fizzled.

But Khurshid Ahmed, chairman of the Institute of Policy Studies, an
Islamabad think-tank, argues it would b e to say that General
Musharraf has escaped a popular backlash. According to Mr Ahmed, who
is also a senator for Jamaat-i-Islami, part of the Muttahida
Majlis-i-Amal (MMA), an alliance of six Islamist parties ,

That may be true. But it does seem that public opinion allows the
generals more leeway than they prefer to admit ., says Mr Hoodhbhoy ,
He thinks this may even be true of the policy stance that Pakistanis
see as the most fundamental of all: support for the struggle for
self-determination of Muslims in Indian-controlled Kashmir. 



Solving Kashmir
Since 1990, one form that support has taken has been the clandestine
sponsorship of armed insurgency. General Musharraf has repeatedly
promised to sto p, most recently in a breakthrough meeting with Mr
Vajpayee in January. This time, he may just mean it.

He is under pressure from America and from Pakistan's other important
ally, China. When he visited Beijing in November, he was left in no
doubt that his hosts, who have been vital providers of arms, and of
missile and nuclear technology, were fed up with Pakistan's cosseting
of jihadis. Besides destabilising Afghanistan and liberating Kashmir,
some holy warriors also want to bring down Chinese rule in what was
briefly East Turkestan and is now the Chinese region of Xinjiang.

Indian officials are reserving judgment. Infiltration of armed
militants from Pakistani- to Indian-administered Kashmir has
abated. But in the winter months anyway, Himalayan snow slows it to a
trickle. There is little sign yet that Pakistan is dismantling the
dozens of militant training camps. 

The way to dispel suspicions about Pakistan's activities in Kashmir,
General Musharraf told parliament, i s. That is the hope held out by
the start last month of a series of meetings on Kashmir and other
bilateral issues between senior Pakistani and Indian officials. But a
solution will not be possible on Pakistan's terms: a plebiscite in the
former kingdom of Jammu & Kashmir, half of which is now under Indian
administration, on the region's future. 

It is often argued that Pakistan's room for negotiation is limited by
popular opinion, formed by decades of indoctrination, starting in the
schoolroom, about the injustice and cruelty of Indian rule in
Kashmir. But some Pakistanis dispute this. Outside parts of Punjab
province, home to many of the Pakistani soldiers and militants who
have died in Kashmir, many people are weary of the whole conflict,
realise it cannot be won and hanker after a lasting reconciliation
with India. 



Those moderate mullahs
Peace with India is even popular with all but an extremist fringe of
Pakistan's Islamist parties. The MMA's Mr Ahmed remains suspicious of
Indian intentions, saying tha t But he insists that the MMA wants
peace and is a force for moderation, having no sympathy at all fo r.

The MMA is partly an invention of the army and the ISI. In the October
2002 elections, the generals were keen not to see too strong a
performance from the two main secular opposition parties: the Muslim
League, led by Nawaz Sharif, whom General Musharraf overthrew in his
coup; and the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) of Benazir Bhutto, another
former prime minister. So they impeded their campaigns, which already
suffered from their leaders' absences in exile, and helped forge a
coalition of the usually fractious Islamist fringe.

This unlikely alliance, capitalising on the fury of Pakistan's Pushtun
minority at the war in Afghanistan, enjoyed unprecedented success. It
won only 11% of the vote. But that was enough to give it 60 out of 342
parliamentary seats, as well as control of one of the four provincial
governments, in North-West Frontier, and a share in a coalition (with
General Musharraf's loyalists) in another, in Baluchistan.

For a year, the democratic fagade the elections were supposed to
produce was obscured by parliament's refusal to ratify General
Musharraf's self-serving changes to the constitution. These gave him,
as president, unprecedented power, and will, through a new National
Security Council, entrench the army's role in politics. Last December,
he struck a deal with the MMA. In return for his promise to stand down
as army chief by the end of 2004, it accepted his presidency until
2007, and his proposed constitutional changes. Not for the first time,
a general found a bargain with the Islamists more palatable than
making concessions to the secular opposition.

Optimists hope that this was a one-shot deal. Amending the
constitution required a two-thirds majority in parliament. Governing
does not. But that is to overestimate General Musharraf's faith in his
own supporters, and to ignore the frailty of their parliamentary
majority. The Pakistan Muslim League (Q) faction that backs him is
less a political party than a random gathering of toadies and
chancers. Both Mr Sharif and Miss Bhutto face arrest if they return to
Pakistan. But they pose more of a real threat to the president than do
the Islamists. Miss Bhutto in particular has been vocal in exploiting
General Musharraf's nuclear embarrassment. So he continues to need the
MMA. 

At the very least that will make it difficult for the government to
reverse Islamic legislation, such as a much-abused blasphemy law, or
the Hudood ordinances, one effect of which is that 88% of women in
Pakistani prisons were convicted of fornication, probably because they
had been raped. An ICG report published in January, calle d,
highlights the government's continued failure to regulate the
thousands of religious schools, or madrassas, the most radical of
which have spawned the Taliban and Pakistani jihadis. The army's
failure to take on Islamic extremism means, in Ms Ahmed's cruel
summary, that 
That, in essence, is the Pakistani conundrum. At home, it means that
General Musharraf deals with Islamist parties in preference to the
Muslim League and the PPP, whose policies are far closer to those he
professes. The sanguine view is that, because he represents the army,
whose senior command he has shuffled in his image, and the army
remains the ultimate arbiter of power, he still represents the best
chance of achieving the fundamental reforms Pakistan needs. 



A commando still
The present government's economic record, at least, deserves
respect. And no civilian leader, none of whom has ever completed a
term in office, would be able to make the necessary about-turns on
Afghanistan and Kashmir. The gloomy view is that the general's power
will fade when he takes off his uniform, bringing a new round of
political uncertainty. Or perhaps there will be another constitutional
change, or, according to the latest rumour, promotion t o.

Ever since seizing power, General Musharraf has spoken passionately
and persuasively of the need to shed the backward-looking, repressive
and anti-western influence of extremist Islam. Abroad, his standing
rests on his credentials as Pakistan's saviour from that strategic
threat. Yet to stay in power, and to burnish those credentials, he
needs to offer tactical concessions to the extremists. Modernisers and
fundamentalists alike may be disappointed in him. The MMA's Mr Ahmed
could be speaking for both sets of critics : We gave him the
opportunity to become a statesman; he remains a commando.