China 

Ideological gymnastics

Mar 11th 2004 | BEIJING 
From The Economist print edition


Even in the People's Republic, property is no longer theft

 Many of China's communists now privately wish that Karl Marx's words
 could be forgotten. On March 14th, theyolabel. But few expect the
 jitters caused by Marx's legacy to be calmed so easily. 

China's leaders are struggling to keep their conspicuously ill-suited
ideology in line with the accelerating change around them. In 2002
they adopted a new formulation that for the first time allowed private
businessmen to join the Communist Party (though many were already
closet members). Now they want to reassure them that the party will
not, as it did in the 1950s, take away their businesses. 

Officials also want to calm the fears of ordinary citizens that the
assets many now own, particularly as a result of housing
privatisation, may be arbitrarily seized. A survey conducted two years
ago by state-run media in Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou found that
more than 40% of respondents feared their property rights might be
violated and 93% wanted stronger constitutional protection. 

But the amendment has proved controversial. For some, it does not go
far enough in its defence of private property. Others fear that its
main impact will be to protect the wealthy and their often dubiously
acquired assets. Powerful officials and those with good government
connections have been among the biggest beneficiaries of China's
economic reforms.

This has fuelled resentment among the less well-off, who are often the
most conspicuous victims of China's ambivalence towards private
property. Many urban residents have had their houses knocked down with
inadequate compensation, to make way for government-backed
construction projects. Tens of millions of people in rural areas have
been pushed off their land to make way for development (they do not
own the land itself, but they do have usage rights). 

The legacy of Marx is evident in the amendment's wording. While the
constitution declares state property to b e, the wor d is not being
applied to private property. And onl y private property will be
protectedbe protected by the constitution, the use of the wor d hints
at the party's continuing suspicions of the private sector. 

Even if private and state property were to be accorded equal status,
the constitution would provide little more than symbolic
protection. China's courts almost never accept cases argued on
constitutional grounds. There has been no case of a law's
constitutionality being challenged successfully. Other rights
supposedly guaranteed by the constitution, such as freedom of speech
and religion, are routinely ignored. An amendment specifying the
state's respect for human rights is also due to be added to the
constitution at the end of China's annual parliamentary session, but
few expect it to change much. 

And, for all its professed embrace of private enterprise and
ownership, the party (whose name in Chinese literally mean s) still
cannot bring itself to repudiate Marxism. Party scholars still
tortuously argue that the protection of private property rights does
not mean the abandonment of Marx's goal. As one put it in an article
last year, not very reassuringly :


