Charlemagne 

Wider still and wider

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Where do the eventual boundaries of the European Union lie?

GROUCHO MARX famously remarked that he did not want to belong to any
club that would have him as a member. The European Union faces the
opposite problem. It is a club that does not appear to want anybody
who applies for membership. One senior official comments tha t
Unfortunately the Swiss and Norwegians show no signs of wanting to
join. All the would-be new members are poor or big, or both.

On May 1st the EU will formally admit ten new countries. Most of them
are from central Europe, and all are poorer than the EU average. Then,
2007 is the target date for the EU to let in two more relatively poor
countries: Bulgaria and Romania. That would mean an EU of 27, which
would become 28 if Croatia manages, as it hopes, to slip in at around
the same time. By the end of this year, the EU is due to decide
whether formally to open membership negotiations with Turkeyso be
joining the EU; Macedonia has already applied. And if Turkey gets in,
is there any real argument for keeping out Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus
or Georgia (whose new government has just announced that its long-term
goal is t o)? Some people have talked of Russia joining the EU one
day; others have mentioned Israel, a putative Palestinian state or
even Morocco.

All this enthusiasm for Europe should be intensely flattering to the
bureaucrats of Brussels. After all, it is the mark of a good club that
people clamour to become members. An ever-larger EU might also bring
big benefits. It would create a political unit with a huge population,
furthering the Union's ambitions to be a global power. The EU is also
effective at moulding the behaviour of would-be members. The hope is
that by exporting European laws and values, it can expand a zone
committed to prosperous and peaceful co-existence and the rule of
law. 

Yet in reality many of today's members view the prospect of an
ever-expanding Union with a mixture of fatalism and dread. There are
several reasons for this. The first, inevitably, is money. The EU
redistributes billions of euros from rich to poor members: more poor
members means more claimants on the purse. A second is
immigration. One of the Union's fundamental principles is that there
should be freedom to move from one member country to another. But
anti-immigration parties are gaining ground across western Europe;
they could make huge political capital out of potential Turkish
membership.

Then there is the feeling that a larger EU might simply be unable to
function. If you add in all the Balkan countries, Turkey and a further
scattering from the former Soviet Union, you soon arrive at a European
Union of almost 40 members. In a book published this week, Frits
Bolkestein, the Dutch European commissioner, argues tha t To get any
decisions in an EU as big as 40, remaining rights to national vetoes
would surely have to go. On current population projections, moreover,
Turkey could be the biggest member in 15-20 years' time. It would thus
command the biggest block of votes, in a Union that is already
responsible for as much as 50% of the new domestic law in its member
countries.



Contra vox pop
Ordinary citizens in today's EU of 15 could come up with any number of
plausible-sounding objections to Turkish or Ukrainian membership. They
are not really European, they are too poor, they are too
different. But all such objections have been defined away in
Brussels. Turkey was accepted as at least a potential candidate as far
back as the 1960s, on the basis that part of its land-mass is in
Europe. As for Ukraine or even Russia, they surely fit the traditional
geographic definition of a Europe that stretches from the Atlantic to
the Urals.

Moreover, the European Union has consistently rejected the idea of
insisting on a minimum level of income or wealth for EU members. Its
only serious economic demand is that members should have  a.

The question of European values may be the most sensitive of all. Some
people in today's EU may believe that the borders of Europe are those
of traditional Christendom, but this position has never been formally
endorsed by EU leaders. They are understandably wary of ethnic- or
religion-based definitions of Europe. After all, today's Union already
has millions of Muslim and black citizens. Two possible future
members, Albania and Bosnia, are mainly Muslim by heritage. Instead
the EU defines itself as  a. Any European country that embraces
democracy and human rights is fit for membership.

Citing national interest or public opinion might seem a standard
procedure in discussing a far-reaching foreign-policy decision in a
nation-state. But it is regarded as barely respectable in the
multinational European Union. The EU is comfortable talking about
values, but uncomfortable talking about interests. And it has
consistently been built over the heads of its citizens. Although all
ten new members held referendums to approve their entry, voters in the
15 existing members were not consulted. Opinion polls in France show
strong opposition to this enlargement. But when the French government
tentatively floated the notion of holding a vote to approve it, this
was swiftly denounced and quickly dropped. Whether such high-minded
elitism will be enough to drive through the even more controversial
enlargements to come must be open to question.


