Evolution 

Grandmother's footsteps

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Alamy 
 
 

 

Why women live so long

NATURE is unsentimental. In Herbert Spencer's famous phrase, it is a
question of the survival of the fittest. You are born. If you are
lucky, you reproduce. Then you die. Indeed, once you can no longer
reproduce you are, evolutionarily speaking, dead anyway. That, at
least, is the conventional wisdom. So it has been a bit of a mystery
why women, who normally become infertile in their mid-40s with the
arrival of the menopause, often live on and on. Indeed, the average
lifespan of women in almost all societies exceeds that of mne of
individuals who are breeding are found in many species. But they are
usually young animals that have yet to establish themselves, rather
than relics from previous generations. The post-reproductive elderly
just die. Chimpanzees, for example, have a similar pattern of
fertility to people. A female chimp's fertility peaks in her late 20s,
and is more or less extinguished by her mid-40s. But in chimpanzees,
mortality rises as fertility declines. 

Nor, despite the increase in average lifespan in the rich world over
the past few centuries, is post-reproductive survival a modern
phenomenon. Until very recently, most of the increase has been due to
better survival in childhood and youth, rather than the increased
prolongation of middle age into old age. Even in pre-industrial
populations, around a third of women were over 45.

All this suggests that the prolonged old age of peoplef the records Dr
Lahdenpera was working with allowed her to dig into the details of how
this came about.

First, it was nothing to do with a long-lived woman having had more
offspring in the first place, and the number of her grandchildren thus
merely being a function of the number of her children. Nor was there
any detectable effect due to the socio-economic status of the women
involved. Rich or poor, high- or low-born, all showed the same
trend. And, contrary to the beliefs of some workers in the field, both
sons and daughters benefited from the survival of a matriarch, not
merely daughters alone.

Nor was the increase due to a single effect. Instead, Dr Lahdenpera
was able to disentangle a range of beneficial phenomena which, when
added together, resulted in the increased reproductive success that
she observed. People whose mothers were still alive both gave birth to
more offspring and raised a higher proportion of those offspring to
adulthood. They also gave birth to their first children at a younger
age than those whose mothers had died, and the births of their
children were more closely spaced. All of these things contribute to
reproductive output. 

Moreover, the physical presence of the matriarch was vital. Children
who lived more than 20km from their mothers produced significantly
fewer offspring than those who lived in the same village. That
suggests the increase in the number of grandchildren was due not to
some subtle genetic effect, but rather to help