The Australian economy 

America's ugly sister

Mar 18th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Australia's economy looks suspiciously like America's just before its bubble burst
 
 
 

 
Get article background

IN LATE 1995, when Australia had a huge current-account deficit of 5% of GDP, The Economist suggested, tongue in cheek, that Australia looked rather like Mexico before its currency collapsed at the end of 1994. We predicted that the Australian dollar would also tumble. The Aussie dollar did indeed fall by over 40% over the next five years. Today we feel compelled to make another rude observation: the Australian economy now looks not like Mexico's, but like that of its bigger neighbour, the United States—just before its bubble burst in 2000.

In the same way as America enjoyed a “new economy” in the 1990s, so too has Australia's economy seen dramatic improvements. Thanks to wide-ranging structural reforms and sounder monetary and fiscal policies, Australia's economy has recently been one of the best performers in the world. It has enjoyed 12 years of uninterrupted expansion, with annual growth averaging almost 4%. Australia's productivity growth has nearly doubled over the past decade, outpacing even America's. Thus Australia is sometimes described as a Cinderella economy, transformed from a poor scullery maid to a glittering princess. Look closer, however, and the Australian economy is not Cinderella, but America's ugly sister. 

Australia's productivity gains, like America's in the 1990s, have been genuine. But after any long economic boom there is always the danger that people get carried away, believing erroneously that the economic cycle has been banished. Having narrowed in the late 1990s, Australia's current-account deficit has swollen again to 6% of GDP, even bigger than America's. As consumer spending has outpaced incomes, household saving has plunged. Australia now has a negative saving rate. Households have been on an extraordinary borrowing binge, with debt rising more than twice as fast as in the United States over the past decade. Much of this borrowing has been done to buy homes, not just to live in, but as an investment. Residential property prices have soared. Some 45% of all new mortgage borrowing last year was by investors chasing capital gains, not owner-occupiers. Australia has become another hotbed of irrational exuberance.

One big difference between Australia and America is that, while Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, can be criticised for cheering on the bubble through his over-enthusiasm for the new economy, the Reserve Bank of Australia has given repeated warnings about soaring household debt and house prices in an effort to cool things down. The Reserve Bank raised interest rates twice last year partly because of such concerns. Arguably it could have done more. But if anything is to blame for Australia's housing bubble, it is not the central bank, but the government's tax policies. Since 1999 the tax rate on capital gains has, in effect, been half the top rate of income tax, luring more speculative money into property. 

The housing market now seems to be wobbling (see article) and there is a risk that property prices could fall sharply. When housing bubbles burst they harm economies much more than stockmarket bubbles, because people have a lot more money tied up in houses than in shares, and the associated credit boom makes consumers vulnerable. The good news is that there is plenty of room for Australia to cut interest rates and taxes if necessary to support the economy. The government has a budget surplus and its debt of 18% of GDP is the lowest of any big rich economy. But the clock is striking midnight on Australia's boom: a downturn may not be far off. 


