China's economy 

Losing its balance

Mar 18th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


China needs to slow its economy. But can it do so without crashing it
 
 
 

 
THE effect is both magnetic and awe-inspiring. From the outside China's progress looks brilliant. The country's breakneck growth—on average 9% a year since reforms began in 1978—has been the envy of the world and a boon to global markets. In the past 25 years still-communist China has been the fastest-growing large economy in the world. At $1.4 trillion, it is already the globe's sixth-largest in terms of gross domestic product. Foreign firms have responded with enthusiasm, investing heavily in the country (see our survey). 



A two-speed economy
But can China continue to expand at this pace Almost certainly not, at least at its recent even-more-rapid clip. Much of China's growth is the welcome product of economic reforms. But too much of recent growth has also been the result of an investment boom fuelled by easy credit. The result is a bifurcated economy. On the one hand, demand in such sectors as property, cement, steel and cars has grown so fast that it is alarming even the leadership in Beijing. At the country's annual National People's Congress that concluded on March 14th, the prime minister, Wen Jiabao, warned that the bank lending which is fuelling such demand must be curbed if China is to maintain its economic stability. On the other hand, the rapid expansion in production capacity, especially by Chinese firms supplying the domestic market, has resulted in an accumulating surplus of other manufactured goods. 

This over-investment is currently one of China's biggest problems, pointing to future deflation. Worse still, China's recent growth has become increasingly inefficient. Its ICOR (incremental capital-output ratio), which measures how much growth “bang” China is getting for its investment “buck”, indicates that the country is having to plough in more money to generate the same growth—currently more than $4 to generate each additional $1 of annual output compared with $2-3 in the 1980s and 1990s. This is unsustainable. In 2003 an unparalleled 47% of China's GDP was accounted for by fixed capital investment. China's economy must slow down.

There are early signs that this may be happening. Apparently well aware of the problem, China's policymakers have started to tighten credit. Figures for the first few months of 2004 show that car sales, retail sales, food prices and inflation appear to be moderating slightly. But the problem for a country that has still travelled only a part of the way from socialism to capitalism is that the normal mechanisms that regulate a genuine market economy do not work properly. China's leaders have only the bluntest tools at their disposal and limited room for manoeuvre. A rise in interest rates would help to curb credit even further, but that could cripple the government's finances at a time when the country is already running a large budget deficit—its public debt, now 30% of GDP, is rising rapidly. Instead, policymakers are resorting to very communist solutions—ordering their banks to stop lending to over-frothy sectors. That only reinforces the banks' unhealthy ties to the government and hampers their ability to make independent commercial decisions on lending.

A revaluation upwards of the yuan-dollar peg could slow over-rapid growth and would be warmly welcomed by the rest of the world. But that might also be a blow to the country's successful exporters—many of which happen to be foreign-invested companies. This is one reason why the government, despite prodding from America, continues to set its face against an appreciation of its currency.

There is a real possibility, therefore, that any concerted and consistent attempt by China's leaders to slow their country's economy may fail to achieve a soft landing and instead bring on a crash. Again, Mr Wen and his colleagues are well aware of the conundrum. They have to maintain a precarious balance. While the current pace of growth cannot last, equally China cannot let its economy slow too much. Its leaders need at least 7% annual growth, they reckon, to continue to create enough jobs to absorb surplus rural labour and the workers laid off by state-owned enterprises. And, to avoid creating social instability, they need to revitalise a countryside that has been left behind in what has been a primarily urban boom.



The capitalist road
So what should China's leaders do There is no single remedy for the range of dilemmas facing them, and no simple way to slow growth safely. Instead, they have to consider a range of risky, but necessary measures. In the short term, they are right that a full flotation of the Chinese currency is too fraught with danger, but raising its value gradually against the dollar should be possible. This could restrain growth in the domestic money supply, curbing demand, without being too big a blow to exporters. At the same time, they must move more aggressively to liberalise China's financial sector in order to introduce real price signals—freeing banks to set interest rates on loans and to make their own decisions; inviting foreign investment into the banking industry; and encouraging new non-bank financial rivals. 

Just as urgent is the need to push ahead with structural changes which may have an effect only in the longer term, but are crucial if China is to maintain growth and avoid a crash. Genuine privatisations of state-owned enterprises are essential, even if that results in many of them shedding workers. Private businesses could supply new jobs to replace the ones lost in the state sector if they are given the freedom to grow. That means streamlining China's huge bureaucracy, which tangles too many firms in red tape and corruption. Gradually reducing corporate and personal tax rates, among the highest in Asia, would also help firms to grow.

Finally, China's leaders must, sooner rather than later, embrace land reform, awarding 800m rural dwellers the right to secure ownership of the land which they farm. This could give millions of Chinese the incentive to invest in improving their farms, turning them into small businessmen and consumers. None of these measures will be easy. But all are necessary if China's dazzling success is not, some day, to turn to dust.


