Chinese business 

Haier's purpose

Mar 18th 2004 | QINGDAO 
From The Economist print edition


Haier shows why China will struggle to build a global brand

A NEW name has found its way on to the billboards that decorate the world's most expensive cities. Alongside Toshiba and General Electric, the neon lights in downtown Tokyo and Milan now flash: Haier. On the face of it, China's leading maker of fridges, washing machines and air-conditioners looks like a global success. Haier has factories and offices in more than 100 countries, a $15m American headquarters in mid-town Manhattan and a cult following among American college students who chill their beer in its mini-fridges, sold at Wal-Mart. And Haier is gearing up to become even more global. This week it emerged that the firm will soon inject core mainland assets into a small listed firm in Hong Kong to give it a paper currency for overseas acquisitions. 

Haier is lionised in the foreign press too. Fortune rated its boss, Zhang Ruimin, one of the 25 most powerful business people outside America. The Far Eastern Economic Review and the Financial Times each crowned Haier as China's most respected company. The firm has risen from nowhere: its sales, 80 billion yuan ($9.7 billion) in 2003, have grown by 70% a year on average over the past two decades. 


Proud Chinese cite such worldwide attention as proof that their country can build global brands every bit as good as American, Japanese and South Korean ones. Mr Zhang's capitalist style of management—inspired by ex-GE boss Jack Welch—is legendary. And yet for all the accolades, the firm also suffers from serious weaknesses which could take a heavy toll.

In 1984, Mr Zhang, then a minor bureaucrat in Qingdao, a port city south of Beijing, took control of a loss-making refrigerator firm. He inherited an organisation with workers so ill-disciplined that they got drunk and urinated on the factory floor. To deliver a shock, Mr Zhang ordered his workers to smash 76 faulty fridges from the stockroom, laying into the first himself with a sledgehammer—now preserved for its symbolism in Haier's museum. Mr Zhang then introduced strict rewards and punishments. In homage to the “struggle sessions” of the Cultural Revolution, he made errant workers stand on red footprints painted on the factory floor and publicly confess their failings.

Such discipline made Haier profitable within a year. By 1991 it was market leader in China and Mr Zhang had expanded beyond fridges into a range of white goods by taking over other moribund state enterprises. Today he is an alternate member of the Communist Party Central Committee—a rare honour for a businessman. Haier's factory sheds cover more than a square kilometre of Qingdao. Haier is the leading seller in China of most home appliances, with market shares of 20-70%.



What will be will be
From such a strong base, international expansion must seem logical and inevitable. Haier is by no means the only Chinese firm eyeing up the rest of the world. But while the big oil and commodity producers are buying resources overseas and most mainland manufacturers are content to sell their goods under foreign firms' labels, Haier is trying something much harder: to create a genuine global brand.

It has had some success. Its overseas sales are currently $1 billion. Haier claims 30% of the market for small fridges and half the market for wine coolers in America, and a tenth of Europe's air-conditioner market. Haier is now the world's fourth-largest white-goods maker behind Whirlpool, Electrolux and Bosch-Siemens and ahead of GE—though that is mostly owing to its big domestic production volumes. Mr Zhang wants to be number three.

But size does not automatically mean quality, just as buying name recognition at any price (that Manhattan HQ) does not equal careful brand-building. Haier's drive into markets abroad mirrors a push into new markets at home. In both, diversification is driven by opportunism and desperation, not good strategy. Predicting that profits in 2004 will be flat at 2 billion yuan for a third successive year, despite an expected 20-30% rise in sales, Mr Zhang admits that plunging returns in his core white goods business are driving him abroad. After China joined the World Trade Organisation, he says, “every multinational set up in China. Margins are low here. If we don't go outside, we cannot survive.”

Outside China, Haier has so far concentrated on niches—mini-fridges (to which it adds a handy fold-down flap for a laptop) and wine coolers. But to continue to grow globally it will have to compete with the likes of Whirlpool in their main markets. Yet Haier lacks such firm's R&D, their design skills—it employs just ten researchers in America—their distribution or their service networks. Mr Zhang says his biggest headache is hiring decent managers, since he cannot pay as well as rivals. Haier does not have their established brands—or the money to build one. 

Nor is Haier being careful to keep costs low. Mr Zhang insists that Haier must produce outside China to be responsive to customers. Yet, at a stroke, that deprives Haier of its greatest advantage: China's vast pool of low-cost labour. Meanwhile, Haier's attempt to reward creativity—allowing every engineer the freedom to design and build his own products—has worked too well, leaving it with a bewildering 96 categories of goods in 15,100 specifications, including a fridge that pickles Korean kimchee cabbage and a washing machine that also cleans sweet potatoes. Most of these variants add more to production costs and complexity than they will ever add to sales. Worse, the group has moved beyond white goods into computers, mobile phones (where sales have badly disappointed), and even interior design and pharmaceuticals. All with unlimited potential, insists Mr Zhang. “This is a globalised era. No single industry can survive. There is a great future in these markets.”

This attitude is widespread in China. Rather than focusing on a core business or dominating a few markets, as western, Japanese and South Korean managers have slowly learned to do, their Chinese counterparts quit any market where competition is rising, as so many other profitable opportunities beckon. Lack of accountability—not even Mr Zhang can say who really owns Haier—and cheap loans from state banks encourage this trend. The result is firms that are broad but shallow, thinly-spread and managerially stretched. Sadly for Haier, that is the very opposite of a focused, global brand. 


