The British budget 

Lucky Gordon

Mar 18th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


The chancellor deserved his luck on the economy. On the public finances, he is pushing it 
Reuters 
 
 

 
Get article background

GORDON BROWN, who delivered his eighth budget this week, will soon achieve a remarkable record in political longevity. Already, he is the longest serving post-war chancellor of the exchequer, having wrested this accolade from Nigel Lawson, the Tory finance minister in 1983-89. This summer, he will surpass David Lloyd George, who held the post in the early 20th century, to become the longest serving chancellor in the past 100 years. Lloyd George laid the foundations of the welfare state with his redistributive “people's budget” in 1909. Mr Lawson cut punitive income-tax rates but is now best remembered for the boom that turned into slump in the early 1990s. What will history make of Mr Brown?

If the judgment were only about “the economy, stupid”, things are, so far, looking good. Mr Brown has delivered the end to boom and bust that he promised. Unlike most other big economies, Britain has withstood the world recession and has grown steadily over the past few years. Inflation has remained tame even though unemployment has steadily declined.

Mr Brown cannot take all the credit. He was in the right place at the right time. His predecessor, Kenneth Clarke, engineered a smooth recovery from the Lawson bust. The inflation-targeting regime, introduced after Britain was spat out of the European exchange-rate mechanism in 1992, was already proving a success. The outstanding economic achievement of the past few years has been the improved performance of the labour market, for which the Tories were largely responsible. 

Mr Brown's initial contribution was to reinforce the inflation-targeting regime by handing over interest rates to the Bank of England. That bold decision has underpinned the credibility of the government's management of the economy. A related achievement, reaffirmed in his budget speech, has been to keep Britain out of the euro. Whatever the political merits of joining the single currency, the economic price would have been too high. As the Treasury showed last year when re-assessing the case for membership, the economy would have been a lot more unstable inside the euro area. 

But if Mr Brown has helped to banish boom and bust in the economy, he has presided over bust and boom in the public finances. Early in his chancellorship, he made much of his prudence. He sat on spending and put up taxes, notoriously through his £5 billion ($9 billion) “stealth” raid on pension funds. And once again, the chancellor was lucky. The dotcom frenzy and stockmarket boom generated a surge in taxes paid by high earners and City firms. 

Mr Brown's good fortune tempted him to push his luck. Four years ago, the chancellor sanctioned an extended spending spree on the public services. Although Mr Brown put up taxes in his post-election budget in 2002, his determination to pump money into public services, especially the National Health Service, has driven the public finances deep into the red. A £15 billion surplus in the fiscal year 2000-01 has turned into a £38 billion deficit—3.4% of GDP—in 2003-04. 



Are you getting your money's worth?
In this week's budget, Mr Brown announced that the six-year public-spending boom would come to an end after 2005-06, with the exception of the NHS and education. But even though the chancellor is reining in expenditure, a structural deficit of at least £10 billion is likely to remain as tax revenues fail to return to their previous peak. Taxes will therefore have to go up again, though not until after next year's election.

If the extra money had been well spent, Mr Brown could be forgiven for abandoning prudence. But the cash is flowing too fast to be well spent, and the government has been too timid in making structural reforms to public services. Rather than allow choice and competition to drive improvements, the chancellor has relied on top-down targets to ensure that extra money leads to better performance. These have made matters worse by generating a blizzard of paperwork and alienating staff. Earlier this month, the IMF expressed worries about the boom in spending on public services; and polls suggest voters are not convinced that they are getting their money's worth.

The most important thing any chancellor can do is to avoid messing up the economy, and, in the short term, good macroeconomics gives the government a strong political hand. In the long term, though, excessive public spending, higher taxes and more regulation will hurt growth. Mr Brown has been lucky, but luck is not enough.


