Iraq, a year on 

A glimmering of hope

Mar 18th 2004 | BAGHDAD AND CAIRO 
From The Economist print edition


Getty 
 
 

 

Though an awful lot has gone, and is going, wrong, Iraqis are much freer, and some other Arabs a tiny bit so too

SITTING cross-legged in his Abu Ghraib mosque, an island surrounded by sewage, Sheikh Yasseen Zubaie, the Sunni imam, remembers pre-war Iraq with nostalgia. “The council used to pump out the muck every three weeks. Now they promise, and do nothing,” he says. 

War and occupation have made life harder for this town in the Sunni triangle west of Baghdad, where support for the insurgency is strongest. In addition to the sewage, townspeople live with dozens of Estonian troops guarding the market road. At night, power-cuts cloak the city in darkness, except for the arc-lights of Saddam Hussein's largest prison, where most of America's 11,000 prisoners are now detained. Sheikh Zubaie says all his children have diabetes, and he nods at the editorial of a Syrian newspaper now circulating in Iraq. “The foreign occupation of Iraq has destroyed its infrastructure, impoverished its people, dissolved its army and arrested thousands of its sons,” it reads. 


The Iraq war was not as controversial as the Suez war of 1956, which felled a British prime minister, or Vietnam, which traumatised a generation. Yet the war divided both the world powers and world opinion. It claimed its first political victim, outside Iraq, when José María Aznar, Spain's prime minister who supported America's invasion and occupation, lost the election held last weekend, three days after bombs in Madrid killed 200 people. It may yet go on to claim the scalps of George Bush and Tony Blair, the war's chief architects. And, of course, it has changed the Middle East for ever. Was it worth it?

History, as usual, is reserving judgment. The war's critics are not. This war, they say, was illegal (neither self-defence nor authorised by the UN Security Council); unnecessary (Saddam seems not, after all, to have had weapons of mass destruction); and left Iraq worse off than before (his Iraq was at least not being torn apart by civil war). On top of this, it drove a wedge between America and much of Europe, added to Muslim suspicions of the West, and distracted attention from more urgent problems, such as the conflict in Palestine and the hunt for Osama bin Laden. 

Some of these claims are fated to remain matters of opinion. Was the war legal? Britain and America claim that the series of Security Council resolutions violated by Iraq, fortified by a final one threatening “serious consequences” for non-compliance, permitted the resort to force. Was it necessary? The non-discovery of WMD has embarrassed the war's defenders. But after invading Kuwait, Saddam was not only under orders to dispose of WMD: he had also to prove he had done so. His failure to offer proof allowed the inference that he had something to hide. 

Might prolonged inspections have provided a definitive all-clear? Maybe, but on past Iraqi form that might well have prompted another game of “cheat and retreat”. As to whether a WMD-armed Saddam would anyway have proved a danger to the region or beyond, nobody—mercifully—will now have to find out. 

