Board directors 

No more Mr Nice Guy

Mar 18th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Independent directors at big public companies need to be tougher
 
 
 

 
WHERE were they? The rash of corporate scandals over the past few years has produced not only outrage at the greed and shenanigans of top executives, but also incredulity that their boards of directors went along with their misdeeds. What did directors know and when did they know it? Were they, too, corrupt, or merely incompetent or complacent? These are now the questions being asked in dozens of criminal investigations and scores of lawsuits. At the same time, regulators in America and Europe have placed new burdens on board directors and, despite the perceived failure of so many directors in the recent past, the favourite remedy for ensuring corporate rectitude in the future is to appoint a new generation of directors who will, next time, be truly independent and ever watchful. What was once often a comfortable, and lucrative, sinecure is beginning to look like the job from hell.

As a result, the behaviour of corporate boards has already begun to change in important ways (see article). But there is still much confusion. What exactly are directors supposed to be doing? The answer seems obvious: representing shareholders. Yet what is the best way to do that? Should directors aim to help the chief executive—who, after all, is also supposed to be acting in the best interests of shareholders—by offering advice on management or strategy? Or is the main task of independent directors to monitor a firm's managers, and make sure they obey the rules, don't pay themselves too much and generally behave? In other words, should directors see their role as that of colleague or cop? 

“Both”, would be the ideal answer. And in superbly run firms, playing both roles simultaneously may be possible. But in many big companies, directors have found it impossible to be both effective guard dogs and loyal members of the pack, and most have chosen to be the latter. This has also been the choice that most bosses want them to make. How much more comfortable it is to work chummily with the clever person who has appointed you, or had a strong say in your selection, than to look continuously over his shoulder and ask awkward or embarrassing questions. It is understandable that so many directors have taken this approach, but it is the wrong one. 



The perils of collegiality
The primary function of independent board directors in a large public company is to monitor the firm's managers, not to give strategic or managerial advice, and directors should allow nothing to impair their monitoring role. Most big firms operate in highly competitive markets, and honest strategic errors will be quickly punished by rivals. Moreover, bosses are not short of advice, from consultants, industry experts and management gurus, not to mention their own subordinates. But market competition cannot monitor the internal workings of a firm, check an overweening boss, expose a fraud or simply stop top managers from paying themselves far too much. Only independent directors can perform these essential tasks. 

This inevitably will require more of an adversarial stance from directors. Of course, to act as effective monitors directors need to know enough about a company's operations to ask the right questions, and they will form views on its strategy. If they think a firm is headed in the wrong direction, they should say so. But they must remember that their first duty is to speak for shareholders, and that the firm's boss works for them, as the shareholders' representatives, not the other way around. Despite encouraging steps in this direction, there is a long way to go. Warren Buffett, the world's most successful investor and an acute observer of corporate America, has no doubt about this. For him the “acid test” of directorial independence is chief executives' pay, which has continued to soar, at least in America, through good times and bad. And he has no doubt about why this “piracy”, as he calls it, has succeeded. Too often, he has written, “boardroom atmosphere” means that collegiality trumps independence. Whenever it does, millions of shareholders are the losers.

