Obesity 

A staple in time...

Mar 25th 2004 | BEVERLY HILLS AND SEATTLE 
From The Economist print edition


A drastic way to lose weight gathers legions of fans

 says Dr Jamshid Nazarian . Indeed so. When the morbidly obese visit
 the Beverly Hills office of the impressively skinny Dr Nazarian, they
 are desperate. His radical solution to their excessive weight is th
 e. He will staple off the top of the stomach; use more staples to
 create a tiny substitute; and then link this pouch to the small
 intestine. No wonder patients need sympathetic pre-operative
 counselling and long-term post-operative monitoring. 

Dr Nazarian' s country, overtaking smoking. Already, some 300,000
Americans die each year because they are too fat. 


Depressingly, the trend shows no signs of flagging. Indeed, while the
poor and black are more likely to be obese than the rich and white,
the Rand Corporation's Roland Sturm pooh-poohs the notion that higher
education and greater wealth will stem the broadening tide. His
research shows rising numbers in all social groups, with the numbers
of morbidly obese increasing twice as fast as the merely obese.

Three years ago Ellen Buskeek, who is 50, was one of their number. She
weighed 293 pounds. Walking upstairs left her heart pounding. She had
asthma, and was close to developing diabetes. Ms Buskeek had tried
various diets, but none worked. So in May 2002 she had her stomach
surgically reduced to the size of a shot glass. She now weighs about
150 pounds, most of her health problems have vanished, and she cycles
with no trouble.

Once their stomachs are tiny, most patients not only eat far less but
also lose the desire to over-eat, possibly because of changes in a
hormone called ghrelin that is secreted by the stomach. The mountains
of excess flesh soon slip off, so much so that about half of bariatric
patients later undergo surgery to remove surplus skin flapping around
their abdomen, upper arms and legs. Obesity-related diseases such as
asthma or diabetes disappear. 

As the procedure becomes more common, famous patients are
enthusiastically promoting it. So, too, are health companies. Dr
Nazarian is connected with JEG Diversified Healthcare, a California
company that markets a programme called LivLite to promote the
benefits of bariatric surgery across America. LivLite and its
competitors offer something for everyone. For doctors and hospitals,
they offer generous profits: the surgeon's fee for the two-hour
operation will be around $5,000 and an expensive hospital bed will be
filled for four days. For insurance companies, which may have to shell
out $30,000-70,000 for everything from preliminary counselling to
post-operative care and cosmetic surgery, they offer long-term
savings: they will not have to pay for all the ailments that a
morbidly obese person will inevitably succumb to over the years. 

Richard Thirlby, a surgeon in Seattle who has performed bariatric
surgery since 1984, argues that its cost is offset both by the
patient's better health and because expensive diet regimens are made
superfluous (Americans spend perhaps $40 billion a year on trying to
lose weight.) says Dr Thirlby.

Yet it is not risk-free. Obese people are already unhealthy, which
makes surgery risky. Perhaps as many as 2% of patients die during or
soon after surgery, according to a recent issue of the New England
Journal of Medicine. Even more require follow-up surgery to repair
problems, such as staples coming adrift. The procedure does not always
work; some patients are so addicted to food that they eat small
amounts of calorie-rich victuals almost constantly, even gaining
weight. 

Bariatric surgery's complications, price and growing frequency have
put it under a spotlight. Massachusetts health officials are studying
the practice, and may move to regulate it. The American Society for
Bariatric Surgery