Slovakia 

Scandalous

Mar 25th 2004 | BRATISLAVA 
From The Economist print edition


The disturbing popularity of Vladimir Meciar

SLOVAKS see their presidential election on April 3rd as a dull
affair. But to outsiders it verges on the shocking. The front-runner
is Vladimir Meciar, a former prime minister widely seen as a bad hat
who engineered his country's break-up with the Czech Republic in 1993,
let cronyism hijack the economy, and flouted democratic norms with
such abandon that neither the European Union nor NATO would even talk
of letting Slovakia in. He will probably lose, because his opponents
will unite against him; and the job is mainly ceremonial. But why do
so many Slovaks want Mr Meciar back, even as a figurehead, when their
country is at last joining NATO (next week) and the EU (on May 1st)? 

The idea seems more incongruous given that Slovakia's centre-right
government, which ousted Mr Meciar six years ago and was re-elected in
2002, is praised across Europe for its economic reforms. Although
defections have cost it an assured parliamentary majority, it has
brought in a 19% flat tax for profits and incomes, a flexible labour
code and American-style welfare reforms. For public pensions, new
personal accounts run by private companies come in January. Health and
education are next. The reforms are working, despite unrest among poor
Roma (gypsies) in eastern Slovakia. Foreign investment is pouring in;
unemployment is falling. 

But Slovakia has lots of poor people who feel that reforms have
brought more pain than gain. Many back Mr Meciar, as do
nationalists. He courts centrists by portraying himself as a committed
European, though he was far from that when in power. The presidency
would give him a graceful exit from parliament, where he has lost
ground to a younger populist, Robert Fico, founder of a left-leaning
opposition party called Smer. Mr Fico is rated as Slovakia's most
trusted politician, with Mr Meciar second. The prime minister, Mikulas
Dzurinda, comes miles behind. 

Mr Fico is sitting out the presidential race, because he wants the job
of prime minister. That leaves the incumbent president, Rudolf
Schuster, a veteran ex-communist, as Mr Meciar's main rival on the
left, in a field of 11. Mr Schuster beat Mr Meciar in the 1999
presidential election, but his star has since faded. The main
centre-right contender is Eduard Kukan, the foreign minister. Nobody
is likely to win outright in the first round, forcing a run-off
between the top two. Mr Kukan would probably win against either
rival. But a run-off that pitted Mr Meciar against Mr Schuster could
go either way. 

Voters are also being asked if they want an early parliamentary
election, before the due date of 2006, in a non-binding referendum
demanded by trade unions. A strong yes vote would encourage Mr Fico;
so should the presidential election, whatever its result. Mr Meciar
will be weakened if he loses; if he wins, he will be out of
parliament. Either event will bring closer Mr Fico's goal of wresting
power from Mr Dzurinda's government, without sharing it with Mr Meciar
or anyone else.
