Israel and Palestine 

Has the death of the sheikh really changed anything?

Mar 25th 2004 | GAZA AND JERUSALEM 
From The Economist print edition


Reuters 
 
 

 

The assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin should not divert attention
from deeper changes in Israeli politics

Get article background

THOSE two tangled entitiesor to an even bloodier version of the
stalemate that has long been a major cause of instability throughout
the Middle East. The assassination by Israeli forces on March 22nd of
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin (see article), a founder of the Islamic Resistance
Movement, better known by its acronym Hamas, plainly marks a dangerous
turn.

Rarely has Israel been so roundly condemned across the world; seldom
has peace seemed so very far away. Various Palestinian groups swore
vengeancent up, perhaps even speed up, a process of change under way
in both Palestinian and Israeli camps since Israel's prime minister,
Ariel Sharon, declared in December that Israel would withdraw from the
Gaza Strip. This coastal area, wedged between Egypt and Israel proper,
where some 1.2m Palestinians live in surly squalor, is the lesser part
of a would-be state of Palestine. 

The Israeli promise to withdraw has raised numerous as-yet-unanswered
questions, some of which Mr Sharon has yet to address. Would
withdrawal be total? Probably, yes. Would all 7,500 Jewish settlers
have to leave? Probably, yes. Would they be relocated to the West
Bank? Not if Mr Sharon is to receive even qualified endorsement from
the Americans when he goes to Washington next month. Would Israel
leave troops in outposts throughout the strip? Maybe. Who would police
the corridor marking the boundary between Gaza and Egypt? How much
will the Egyptians be involved? It isn't clear. 

But two much bigger questions have emerged since Mr Sharon's dramatic
declaration. First, who among the Palestinians would fill the vacuum
in Gazad where Palestinians populate the West Bank without the
prospect of a full-fledged state on it. 

By most Israeli interpretations, killing Mr Yassin was mainly intended
by Mr Sharon to show his doubters, especially within Likud, that he is
not going soft on Palestinian terrorism and that his proposed
withdrawal from Gaza should not be taken as a sign of weakness, as
when Israeli forces withdrew from Lebanon four years ago. Moreover, Mr
Sharon hopes that, by decapitating Hamas's leadership, he will weaken
its ability to carry out suicide and other attacks against Israel. It
has been made clear that all Hamas leaders, including Mr Yassin's
successor, Dr Abdel Aziz Rantisi, are liable to be killed too. 

Still, however fiercely Mr Sharon attacks Hamas, it is almost certain
that two of Likud's three partners in government, the National
Religious Party and the far-right National Union, will abandon
Israel's ruling coalition if the decision to withdraw from Gaza proves
irrevocable. So Mr Sharon, to keep a majority, will either have to
team up with the Labour opposition or even face an election. He would
probably win, though less comfortably than before, and would have to
seek other coalition partners, again including Labour and perhaps
others likely to be more flexible on the Palestinian question. To stay
in power, the bellicose Mr Sharon will be tugged back towards the more
negotiation-minded centre.



Hamas hunkers down
In the short run, that barely concerns Hamas. The day after the death
of Mr Yassin (and seven other Palestinians in the same missile attack,
as they came out of a mosque at dawn), the movement's swift naming of
Dr Rantisi showed that there would be no vacuum in Hamas's
leadership. Revenge, of course, is assured : vowed the new leader as
he received his mantle at a packed football stadium in Gaza.

Reuters 
 
 
Bellicose but beleaguered
 
For most Israelis, the wheelchair-bound Mr Yassin was neither a
religious nor a spiritual leader ., said the army chief of staff,
General Moshe Yaalon. The general said he hoped that killing Hamas's
leaders woul d

But moderation will have to wait. Some 200,000 Palestinians followed
Mr Yassin's funeral procession. Smaller but equally angry
demonstrations erupted in the Arab parts of Jerusalem, on the West
Bank and in the Palestinian diaspora in Lebanon, Jordan, Syria and
even Sudan. Meanwhile Yasser Arafat, head of the Palestinian Authority
(PA) and still leader of the biggest of thos e Israel expects to take
over in Gaza, remains marooned in his Ramallah headquarters, assailed
by Palestinians outraged by the Israeli action but powerless to do
anything about it. 

That powerlessness, concedes a PA minister, merely helps Hamas . he
says .

In any event, Dr Rantisi, who has understandably gone to ground, is
likely to be even more radical than his predecessor. Mr Yassin
justified and lauded suicide attacks on Israeli civilians. But his
core constituency was Gaza's devout middle class, and he expended much
energy overseeing the Islamic charities and social services he had
spent 30 years building up. More recently, in negotiations with the PA
aimed at getting a ceasefire, he had sounded relatively more
pragmatic. If, for example, a majority of Palestinians were to vote
for a two-state solution and Israel withdrew to the 1967 ceasefire
line that divides the West Bank from Israel proper, Mr Yassin said he
would abide by that verdict and abjure violencey option is the
intifada and more resistance. It's the only language Israel
understand.s



Trying to impress doubters at home
That does not seem to bother Mr Sharon. The assassination seems to
have served one purposewhom to resume negotiation will increase. Mr
Sharon says he has always been ready to talk, provided that the P A
and stops the suicide bombers from unleashing their terror in
Israel. But Labour under Shimon Peres, the former prime minister who
might become foreign minister, is likelier to acknowledge that the PA
is in no condition to endure the Palestinian civil war that would
ensue if it did turn against Hamas. Moreover, Mr Peres thinks that Mr
Arafat must be brought back into the equation. 



Meanwhile, they rot away
For the Palestinians, this is scant comfort. Mr Peres, they note,
failed repeatedly to win an agreement when he was in power
before. They see themselves being relentlessly choked into ghettoes on
the West Bank, with travel between different parts of their truncated
territory becoming harder than ever. Roadblocks and curfews make
ordinary living a misery for many. While the Israelis say that the
security barrier being built between Israel and the West Bank is
already reducing the number of suicide-bombers coming across, the
Palestinians see it cutting into their land as it curls round Jewish
settlements, making a real Palestinian state look ever less likely.

But the barrier can come down, just as Jewish settlements can be
vacated or dismantled- provided that the political will is there and
that enough Israelis come to accept that only a proper Palestinian
state, not a clutch of cantons, will bring peace. The killing of Mr
Yassin has put such hopes aside for the moment. But even those
Israelis who applauded that action may be slowly shifting their
strategic ground when it comes to the future of the West Bank. In the
long run, that, at any rate, is the one cause for cautious hope. 
