Kosovo 

Field of sorrows

Mar 25th 2004 | PRISTINA 
From The Economist print edition


Renewed violence raises troubling questions over Kosovo's future

NOBODY hides his bitterness. Exactly five years ago Javier Solana,
NATO's then boss, ordered air strikes to end Serb repression and
killings in Kosovo. Five years on Mr Solana was back, as the European
Union's foreign-policy head, fulminating a t an d behaviour that led
to 28 deaths, the ethnic cleansing of 4,000 Kosovo Serbs and Roma
(gypsies), destruction or damage to 366 houses and attacks on 41
Orthodox churches and monasteries.

AFP 
 
 
A burnt-out case
 
Some 100,000 Serbs live in Kosovo, amid a population of some 1.8m
ethnic Albanians. Half live in the north, abutting Serbia proper; but
the rest are in enclaves scattered across the province. It was Serbs
and Roma living in the most vulnerable spots who were chased out in
two days of violence on March 17th and 18th. Their stories are
grim. One lady taking refuge in a school gym in the Serbian enclave of
Gracanica told how schoolchildren rampaged through her house before
hitting her with a hammer. Her 50-year-old son, a victim of childhood
polio, was beaten with his crutches by Albanians screaming : Their
house, in the once mainly Serbian town of Obilic, was burnt. No Serbs
are now left in Obilic. 

In 1999, after 78 days of bombing, the Serbs gave in. Serb rule was
replaced by the UN. Some power has been devolved to an elected
government, whose prime minister, Bajram Rexhepi, calls the violence
a. He has set up a government fund to rebuild destroyed houses and
churches. But this conciliatory move got short shrift from Kosovo's
Serbian Orthodox bishop, who scoffed that sending experts to examine
damaged churches would b e. 

Harri Holkeri, the UN boss in Kosovo, declares that trust has been
destroyed. One UN staffer who worked in the northern town of Mitrovica
says she has seen all her work literally go up in flames. Now western
policymakers face some tough choices. Billboards in Pristina, Kosovo's
capital, display pictures of a road leading to hills behind which
hovers an EU flag. They are advertising the idea that, if Kosovo and
its local institutions adhere to high enough standards, a European
future is just over the hills and not that far away. 

Until this violence erupted, there were hopes that talks on Kosovo's
final status might start in mid-2005. Now, says Mr Holkeri, that
target is no longer realistic. But discontent with the UN, Kosovo's
unresolved status and the stalled economy may just win the extremists
behind the violence more supportfficials were now to speed up
final-status talks, they would be seen by many to be giving in to
violence. 

Oddly, relations between Kosovo's politicians and Serbia's nationalist
prime minister, Vojislav Kostunica, may not be quite as glacial as
they would have their voters believe. In the two days before the
violence erupted, one of Mr Kostunica's top advisers met his
counterparts from the offices of Mr Rexhepi and Ibrahim Rugova,
Kosovo's president, in Switzerland.

Mr Kostunica has talked o f; in UN parlance, this i s. Whatever the
label, it means some form of autonomy for Serbs in parts of
Kosovo. For many Serbs it points to eventual partition. Both Serbs and
ethnic Albanians have been looking at how fighting ended in Bosnia and
Macedonia, hoping for lessons for Kosovo. If they hold open lines
between Serbia and Kosovo, the violence may even galvanise their
work. But that is the hopeful scenario.