Oil 

A burning question

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Alamy 
 
 

 

Why are oil prices so high?

Get article background

MANY people have been wondering why oil has become so costly. Its spot
price has been close to $40 a barrel; one year forward, it fetches
well over $30; and this week petrol prices hit record highs in the
United States. Weekly, analysts have been tweaking their forecasts
upwards. 

The answer may come as a surprise. The usual culprit is the
Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the cartel that tries
to manipulate prices by adjusting agreed output quotas. In February
OPEC shocked the markets by announcing that its members were to slash
thei r on official quotas by 1.5m barrels per day (bpd); the quotas
themselves were to be trimmed by another 1m bpd at the beginning of
April.

However, industry experts say that OPEC countries have hardly cut
output at all in recent weeks. So freely are they still cheating that
only Saudi Arabia, the kingpin of the cartel, has much spare capacity
left. What is more, OPEC ministers might not cut their quotas after
all. Some are wavering, and the oil might keep gushing. The ministers
are due to meet in Vienna on March 31st.

If OPEC is not turning off the spigot, what explains the run-up in
prices? One reason is surely demand: the strongly growing economies of
America and China are guzzling more oil. If this goes on, OPEC's
capacity constraints might bite. However, Algeria's oil minister,
Chakib Khelil, thinks speculation is a more likely answer. He wants
OPEC to cut output on April 1st for fear that the price might drop
suddenly such as hedge funds. Richard Schaeffer of ABN Amro, a Dutch
bank with a big presence on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX),
reports that the amount of speculation in oil i s

 
 
 

 
What is more, despite some sell-offs early this week, there have
clearly been some big bets on high oil prices. Non-commercial net long
positions in futures markets are at an unprecedented level (see
chart). There is, says one trader, a lot o f supporting oil prices. In
its latest oil report, the International Energy Agency said tha t.

But why exactly have speculators piled into the oil market now? One
reason may be uncertainty or disappointment with returns on financial
assets. John Shapiro of Morgan Stanley believes that hedge funds,
endowments and other investors have been drawn to the oil market by
the lack of alternatives. He points to low interest rates and, until
recently, the relatively poor performance of the stockmarket. 

Another factor attracting punters and propping up oil prices may be
what Eric Bolling, an independent trader on the NYMEX, call s
Political troubles in Venezuela, Nigeria and Iraq have long worried
those who fear an interruption of exports. A bigger and newer aspect
of this risk, however, is the fear of terrorism that might be targeted
at oil infrastructure. 

These worries have, in part, been fuelled by a most unexpected source:
the American government. Despite the high prices, American officials
continue to buy oil on the open market to fill their country's
strategic petroleum reserves (SPRs). Why buy, you might ask, when
prices are high, and thereby keep them up? The Senate has asked that
question as well. It passed a non-binding resolution this month
calling on the Bush administration to stop SPR purchases; but Spencer
Abraham, the energy secretary, has refused.

The administration's persistence, coupled with increased strategic
purchases by other governments, has fuelled suspicions that officials
might have some intelligence about terrorist threats to oil
infrastructure. The upshot is that concerns about disruptions to
supply, by OPEC or by terrorists, now add up to what Mr Schaeffer
calls a n on the price of oil. He observes that in the past, prices
have spiked on worries that supply might be interrupted, but have then
fallen back quickly. This time the premium seems to be lingering.

Some experts worry that the longer prices stay high because of this
speculative frenzy, the harder they will fall. Perhaps all that can be
said is that reading the oil market is as difficult today as it has
been for a long time: strong demand, political unrest and OPEC
discipline could drive the price higher, and encourage still more
speculative buying; a slowdown in America or indiscipline in the
cartel could remove a lot of froth in a hurry. Even if the price does
drop, however, it need not collapse, because thanks to OPEC the oil
market is like no other. 

If speculators head for the door, Saudi Arabia, which has been called
the central bank of the oil world, has one card to play that even the
Fed does not. Ali Naimi, the Saudi oil minister, can announce that he
will slash his country's output at once. Speculators will surely take
notice, for he has a proven record of propping up prices. That is the
sort of influence over markets that even Alan Greenspan must envy.


