Grey power

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Changing politics

PHILIPP MISSFELDER is a tall, earnest 24-year-old, head of the youth
organisation of Germany's Christian Democrats (CDU). Last August, he
gave an interview in which he said that the health system would change
over the next 30 years. Old people were living off future generations,
and would eventually have to carry more of the cost of their own
medical treatment, including hip replacements. 

 he says wistfully. In the five days after it was published, he
 received 80 death threats. The police took them seriously enough to
 put a guard on his flat, his office and his parents' home. Furious
 letters still pour into the office of the CDU youth organisation. But
 its membership has risen, by 3,000, for the first time in 20
 years. Young members of rival parties, the Social Democrats and the
 Greens, have been in touch . he says.


Lest it be thought that German old folk are particularly abusive, the
CSIS's Mr Jackson has had a similar experience. A decade ago, he wrote
a report on the excessive generosity of public-service pensions, and
was deluged with nasty mail. The AARP too, having tentatively endorsed
President George Bush's plans for health reform, has been engulfed by
angry letters and telephone calls from its members. Britain's Mr
Willetts recalls an adviser's words :

Everywhere, the political forces supporting the privileges of the
retired are powerful, relative to those of the young . says Giuliano
Amato, a former prime minister of Italy. No wonder: half the members
of Italian trade unions are retired. In local politics too, the
retired are a potent force. When they home in on a town, they become a
lobby for conservation rather than jobs, and health care rather than
schools.

Against this muscle, the young are a feeble force. At first sight,
that is surprising: after all, a large proportion of them have a
common meeting point in universities. They also seem to be well aware
of the threat to their own retirement incomes: a Gallup poll last
autumn found that 24% of 18-29-year-old Americans thought they would
get no benefits from Social Security when they retired. But the young
make less use of their vote than the old. Michael Dimock of the Pew
Research Centre in Washington, DC, recalls how, during his years as a
college lecturer, he would point out the generational imbalance to his
students .

Such indifference will make it harder for governments to undertake
reform. Add in the rising proportion of older people living on the
toil of the young and middle-aged, and you have an interesting
question: should voting rights be somehow adjusted to take more
account of the interests of the young? Should parents have votes on
behalf of their young children? Should people with children have more
votes than people without? Mr Weale of Britain's National Institute of
Economic and Social Research recently asked whether there should be a
maximum age for voting rights, on the grounds that the old may vote
for higher pensions, whereas the young take a long-term view. 



Crabbed age and yout
h Thus John Maynard Keynes, Britain's famous economist, in 1937, less
than a decade before the first baby-boomers were born. 

Although Keynes's timing was poor, he got the trend right. In a
growing number of countries, fertility is falling below replacement
rate. Even if it recovers, zero growth seems the most likely long-term
trend.

Living with that, and with rising life expectancy, will be
difficult. Where births continue to decline, coaxing the old to
continue to work will be only a partial answer. Joseph Chamie of the
United Nations Population Division calculates that the Chinese could
retain today's ratio of workers to old folk only by continuing to work
past the country's average life expectancy. 

Economies with shrinking workforces will grow more slowly or even
contract, even if growth per worker continues to rise. The result will
be a shift in global power :, as Donald Rumsfeld, America's defence
secretary, called France and Germany, will lose ground against
countries whose workforce is still expanding. Numbers do not
inevitably mean poweroo will have to make adjustments. No greater
challenge in social policy faces politicians in the next couple of
decades. 

