France 

When angry voters hit back

Mar 25th 2004 | PARIS 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

The French regional elections confirm the deep unpopularity of most
European governments. First, a look at France; then at Germany

Get article background

, purred Libiration ;, chimed in Le Nouvel Observateur, another
left-leaning title. Assuming that French voters confirm their
first-round battering of President Jacques Chirac's ruling
centre-right party in this weekend's second-round elections for 22
regional councils, Jean-Pierre Raffarin's days as prime minister must
be numbered. Even if he stays, the chances of his government pressing
ahead with its ambitious reform programme now look doubtful.

The governing Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) party had expected a
knock in the first round on March 21st, but it was taken aback by its
scale. The biggest surprise was the swing to the left. Ever since the
humiliation of April 2002, when the Socialist candidate, Lionel
Jospin, was evicted in the first round of the presidential election by
the National Front leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen, the left has been
groping unsuccessfully for a convincing programme, leader and
purpose. But the voters have been forgiving. The Socialists, Greens
and Communists notched up 40% between them, up from 37% at the 2002
parliamentary poll. By contrast, the UMP, along with its centre-right
sister, the Union for French Democracy (UDF), scraped together just
34%, well below the 47% legislative score of the UMP alone in 2002. 

Polls suggest that the left will beat the right by as much as 46% to
36% in the second round. Stiphane Rozes, at CSA, a polling
organisation, predicts that the left will recapture six or seven of
the 14 regions now held by the right. Although they have limited
powers, the regions carry symbolic value. In Britanny, an agricultural
bastion of the right untroubled by big-city anxieties, the combined
left grabbed a hefty 48%. Worse, the left did almost as well in Mr
Raffarin's own backyard, Poitou-Charentes: Sigolhne Royal, a Socialist
parliamentarian whose partner, Frangois Hollande, is the party's
secretary-general, scooped up 46% to the UMP's 33%. In short, these
elections are set to be a crushing humiliation for Mr Chirac and Mr
Raffarin.

How lasting will this shift prove to be? Its impulse does not come
from a coherent, rejuvenated left. Even leading Socialists admitted
beforehand that their party was in disarray. It stems instead from an
unusual mix of circumstances: pre-arranged unity among the three
left-leaning parties; an appeal for a n, which contained the far left;
a strong mobilisation of younger voters; and the whiff of possibility
after the Socialists' unexpected victory in Spain's general election. 

The UMP, already numbed by the conviction of Alain Juppi, its boss,
for political corruption, was also squeezed by division on the
right. It failed to secure the loyalty of the UDF, whose leader,
Frangois Bayrou, was stubbornly convinced of his own chances in the
Aquitaine region. Instead, he was pushed into third place, as were
other UDF lone-rangers. Voters are now expected suddenly to believe in
the two parties' undying love for each other, as they join forces in
the second round. Confusion, if not disillusion, prevails. 

Equally important was the far right. It is a measure of how entrenched
the National Front has become that its 15% first-round score, a robust
performance for any third force and disquieting for an
unapologetically anti-immigrant party, was met with relief. The far
right may not stand a chance of winning a region, and its score was a
notch below the 17% won by Mr Le Pen in the 2002 presidential
election. But far-right parties combined took 28% of the vote in
Alsace; and the Front alone got 23% in Provence-Alpes-Ctte d'Azur. In
Orange, Provence, where elections to departmental councils were also
held, it scored 40%; in Carpentras, 37%. And it enters the second
round as sole third party in no fewer than 17 regions; in one,
Nord-Pas-de-Calais, it beat the UMP into third place. 

Where does all this leave the government? The overwhelming message is
of voters' disgruntlement. Part of this is cyclical: the economy is
near-stagnant and unemployment remains high (9.6%, and 21% among
under-25s). But part of it stems from the government's clumsy failure
to explain clearly what it is doing. Mr Raffarin had promised a reform
programme ,. So far, he has implemented only one element: pension
reform. Next on the list is a health-insurance overhaul, to rein in
soaring costs. After lengthy consultation, proposals are being drawn
up. Labour-market and education reforms are due to follow.

At first glance, the chances of any of these happening now look
slim. Flush with victory, the left will be emboldened for
confrontation. Protesters against budget cuts quickly take to the
streets, the latest being researchers and scientists. Stung by the
charge from the left that it has not done enough to heal the fracture
sociale, the government will find it hard to push painful
reforms. Anyway Mr Chirac is a survivor, not a reformer, and he will
tolerate an unpopular prime minister only so far. 

Hence the speculation over who might replace Mr Raffarin. Candidates
range from Hervi Gaymard, the farm minister, to Michhle Alliot-Marie,
the defence minister. Even if Mr Raffarin were to hang on until the
next potential humiliation, the European elections in Junerhze, where
she was re-elected as a departmental councillor. 

Mr Sarkozy's popularity is not in doubt: he was elected to a
departmental council this week, bagging 79% of the vote in Neuilly, a
suburb of Paris where he was formerly mayor. Nor is his determination
to take action, whether popular or not . he declared this week. That
may be a heroic conclusion to draw from a swing to the left. But, even
if he is correct, the question remains: is Mr Chirac ready to gamble
by picking a man whose success in the job could threaten his own?

