Lexington 

John Kerry, flip-flopper?

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

One accusation that ought not to stick

THE Bush campaign has begun a 90-day media blitz to define John Kerry
as a serial waffler, bet-hedger and panderer. They are having a whale
of a time. On the Republican National Committee's website, you can
play an interactive boxing match: Kerry v Kerry. Click a glove. Pow!
He's for gay marriage (the site gives details of his position). Click
again. Zap! He's against gay marriage (contradictory details). And so
on for 30 rounds, each an example of Mr Kerry supposedly on both sides
of every issue.

The assault is having an effect, or was before Richard Clarke's book
embarrassed the president. Mr Kerry has lost both his poll lead and
the aura of triumph from his party's primaries. In that sense, the
campaign against him is already working. But is it true? Is Mr Kerry
really incoherent and expedient? And if he is, what does that tell you
about the sort of president he might be?

Start by conceding that a certain amount of flip-flopping is
inevitable i n. For example, what would you call someone who opposed
setting up a Department of Homeland Security one minute and espoused
the idea the next? Or who claimed to be a staunch free trader these
fall into one of two categories where changes of mind ought to be
regarded as commendable or at least understandable.

The first category embraces issues on which he changed for the
better. In 1988, Mr Kerry voted against a proposal requiring welfare
recipients to work a few hours a week. In 1996, he voted in favour of
a welfare reform imposing far stricter work requirements. This was
inconsistent. It was also justified. The 1996 welfare reform was one
of the great successes of the Clinton presidency. Similarly, Mr Kerry
used to oppose the idea of expensing stock options, arguing that to do
so would hurt high-tech start-ups. But after the stockmarket bust, and
as evidence grew that unexpensed options caused market distortions, he
altered his line. As John Maynard Keynes said ,

The second and larger category consists of Senate votes that look
contradictory taken out of context, but make sense once the context is
added. Many Senate bills exist in similar drafts, and the final
version frequently includes obnoxious provisions that have nothing to
do with the substance of the bill itself. Senators then face an
unenviable choice. Do they back the bill, with the extra provision
they would otherwise have opposed? Or do they vote against a bill they
support? No wonder no sitting senator has won the presidency since
Kennedy. With 19 years of such nuanced votes to account for, Mr Kerry
is especially vulnerable. 

His idiotic statement about the $87 billion Iraqi reconstruction
packageometimes more hawkish, views on matters such as national
security and welfare reform. 



Resolve v realism
Of course, not all his flip-flops can be explained away. To different
audiences, he has supported and criticised Israel's security fence. He
voted for the Iraq war resolution, criticised the manner in which Mr
Bush went to war, and refused to say whether he thinks the action was,
on balance, justified. He has abandoned some brave stances against
Democratic dogmathe opposite: for being consistently liberal. The
attack o n is really about image: a vacillating Mr Kerry highlights
the president's image as a man of immovable resolve at a time of
national danger.

Yet, almost inadvertently, this debate over image and inconsistency
tells you something profound about the candidates. When Mr Bush
reverses himself (in abandoning his promise to run  a foreign policy,
for instance) he does so boldly, almost spectacularly. There is no
attempt to explain the shift. One set of principles succeeds another,
as if the earlier views never existed. Mr Kerry's reversals, on the
other hand, are products of subtly shifting nuance as he tries, and
fails, to strike a balance between competing views. The one approach
shows resolution, and a tendency to exaggeration; the other, a
tendency to waffle, but also a grasp of how complicated political
realities can be. 



 
