Microsoft 

Windows ` la carte

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

Might the European Commission's controversial new antidote to
Microsoft's monopoly actually work?

HALF a billion euro? Forget about it. The headline-grabbing in other
words, the unbundled version must not cost more than the full version
of Windows. Surely it should cost less.

Yet PC-makers might simply prefer to stick with the full version of
Windows. Today they can do deals with Microsoft's rivals to add extra
software to their PCs. Hewlett-Packard, for example, is to sell PCs
with Apple's media-player software, and Dell ships RealNetworks'
player on some of its computers. But in both cases, Microsoft's media
player is still present. Why antagonise Microsoft by removing it, even
if it were for a small cut in the price of Windows? Philip Lowe, the
commission's director general of competition, notes that rival
software firms already pay PC-makers to carry their software. In
future, he says, they might insist that Microsoft's rival product be
removed.

The scope of the commission's ruling is limited to the European
market. But Thomas Vinje, a lawyer at Clifford Chance, which
represented a consortium of Microsoft's opponents in the case, says
that Europe is probably a big enough market to act as a laboratory in
which to test th e model. If it worked, PC-makers would probably be
able to insist on the same terms worldwide. Hence the unease at
Microsoft: if the commission's ruling is upheld on appeal and the
unbundling of media player goes ahead, its current business model
could start to unravel.

All this, of course, assumes that the remedy is not
overturned. Microsoft says that it will appeal, and will also ask for
the commission's remedies to be suspended while the appeal is
underway. On past form, says John Kallaugher, an expert on comparative
competition law at University College, London, and a partner at Latham
& Watkins, a law firm, the decision on whether or not to suspend the
remedies could come as early as June. The appeal itself would take
several years, however. By then the media-player case may well have
become moot, and Longhorn will probably have been released. But a
ruling in the commission's favour could still shape future versions of
Windows.

By rejecting Microsoft's offer to include rival media players in
Windows, says Brad Smith, Microsoft's general counsel, the commission
turned down an opportunity t o. Such an agreement, he says, would have
demonstrated that future bundling disputes could be solved by
negotiation, on a case-by-case basis. Of course, that would also leave
Microsoft the option of spinning out negotiations indefinitely, to its
own advantage. Recognising this, the commission has in effect taken a
bold gamble, rejecting a solution to a specific problem now in the
hope of establishing a general precedent for the future. If it can get
its remedy to stick, there is an outside chance that it might be able
to dent the mighty Microsoft monopoly. 


