The Supreme Court 

Not ducking

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Justice Scalia refuses to disqualify himself from the Cheney case

TRADITIONALLY, the nine Supreme Court justices are a secretive
bunch. They never give their reasons for refusing or accepting a case,
rarely give interviews, and always strive to remain above the
fray. This, they feel, helps preserve the mystique and power of the
court. All the more astonishing, therefore, that Justice Antonin
Scalia, the court's most conservative and hard-hitting judge, has
chosen to issue a 21-page memorandum explaining why he will not
disqualify himself from a case involving his long-time friend, Dick
Cheney, the American vice-president.

AP/Reuters 
 
 
Veep and friend
 


Ever since the Los Angeles Times discovered two months ago that Mr
Scalia and Mr Cheney had gone on a duck-shooting trip together at the
beginning of the year, Mr Scalia has come under almost daily pressure
from politicians, environmental lobbyists, editorialists and
cartoonists across the United States to recuse himself from the case
when it is heard by the Supreme Court next month. Such fraternising
with a litigant, they argue, opens the judge to charges of impropriety
and bias. 

The case involves an energy policy task-force set up by Mr Cheney in
2001. Suspecting that the vice-president had been secretly inviting
energy-industry executives to task-force meetings, the Sierra Club,
America's biggest environmental group, sued Mr Cheney under the
Federal Advisory Committee Act to force him to divulge the names of
the participants along with the minutes of what had been said. Mr
Cheney refused, claiming that this would be a serious infringement of
his executive privilege. 

With presidential elections looming and a question-mark already
hanging over the vice-president's political future, this is hardly th
e that Mr Scalia claims it to be. Two lower courts have already issued
judgments against Mr Cheney. If the Supreme Court now confirms that he
acted improperly, this would further damage his reputation. Mr
Scalia's vote might prove crucial. If he stepped down, the court could
split 4-4, and the ruling of the lower court would then prevail. 

It is the risk of such hung votes that makes the Supreme Court chary
of recusals. Under a 1974 federal rule, a judge is required to
disqualify himself i f. How this should be interpreted is generally
left to the individual justice. By chance, Mr Scalia has recused
himself from another high-profile case involving the pledge of
allegianceline, the head of an oil industry services company, was an
admirer of the vice-president, he got him to invite Mr Cheney on his
annual duck-shooting trip in Louisiana. The invitation was issued last
spring, long before Mr Cheney's case came before the Supreme Court. As
there were spare places on the vice-president's jet, Mr Scalia flew
down with him. But this was of no financial benefit to himself, as he
had already bought a return air ticket.

There were 13 people on the trip, he says. Sleeping was in rooms of
two or three, save for the vice-president who had his own
quarters. All meals were in common. He was never in the same blind as
the vice-president. Indeed, he was never alone with the
vice-president , he says, adding ,

Mr Scalia points out that Supreme Court judges have long socialised
with congressmen and members of the executive . he says. And he adds :

But as numerous American commentators have pointed out, the question
is not whether Mr Scalia's impartiality has in fact been impaired, but
whether a reasonable person could think that it might have been. And,
so far, he has not fully convinced them that this was not the case. 
