Europe's unpopular governments 

Reluctant reformers

Apr 1st 2004 
From The Economist print edition


European leaders need to make a better case for reform

AFP 
 
 

 


ACROSS the continent, Europe's voters are posing a conundrum for their
governments. Most Europeans now accept, as a general proposition, that
if their economies are to return to faster growth, and unemployment is
to be cut, their bloated pension, welfare and health-care systems, and
their rigid labour-market regulations, all need fairly radical
reform. Yet at national or local elections they are proving quick to
punish governments that put forward any specific proposals that would
inflict pain.

The latest example is France, where the ruling centre-right party was
mauled by the left in last weekend's regional elections. But
governments of the left that have tried reforms have suffered as
well. Germany's Gerhard Schrvder has just been forced to step down as
party leader of the ruling Social Democrats, whose poll ratings are at
an all-time low. Indeed, most European leaders, left or right, seem
unusually unpopular just now. Poland's prime minister is quitting;
Spanish and Greek voters have turfed out their governments; Italy has
just seen yet another general strike against reforms.

Governments everywhere tend to suffer mid-term blues. And French
voters have formed the trying habit of turning against parties they
supported barely a year or two earlieres Chirac, has reacted to his
latest setback by reshuffling his cabinet (see article). So far, it
might just be politics as usual. But the disconnect between the
necessity for reforms and voters' willingness to accept them could now
threaten Europe's sickly economies with another turn for the worse.

The danger is that politicians may respond to electoral setbacks by
slowing down the pace of change. Jean-Pierre Raffarin, who narrowly
hung on to his job as French prime minister this week, declared after
the regional vote that reforms would continue, because they had
to. The choice of Nicolas Sarkozy to be the new French finance
minister is promising: this hyperactive former interior minister is
probably the nearest thing to a free-marketeer that the Raffarin
government can find. Across the Rhine, Mr Schrvder last week delivered
a similar message to the German parliament about sticking to his
Agenda 2010 reforms, despite party troubles. Italy's Silvio Berlusconi
has also promised to hold to the reform path, including tax cuts, no
matter how many strikes he has to face down.

The realisation around Europe that, as Margaret Thatcher once famously
said, there is no alternative, is undoubtedly correct. But even if
some reforms are inevitable, it is all too easy to water them down, or
to postpone their introduction. A chastened Mr Schrvder has already
slowed the speed of reforms. However energetic Mr Sarkozy proves to
be, his boss, Mr Chirac, has always been more of a political survivor
than a genuine reformer. The same is true of Mr Berlusconi, who has
put more emphasis on resolving his own legal problems than on reviving
Italy's moribund economy (see article).

Reluctant reformers might retort that, if Europe's people are
unwilling to accept change, that should be their democratic right. So
long as they are prepared to pay the price in sluggish growth and
higher unemployment, why bother? Yet all the signs are that they are
not happy to pay that price. The recent dissatisfaction with European
governments is surely driven as much by grumpiness over continuing
poor economic performance as by hostility to reforms. 



True believers needed
Moreover, although few voters welcome painful changesat their
electorates have copied them. True believers can prove surprisingly persuasive
