Muslims 

Going after terror

Apr 1st 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Muslim leaders and the government try working together 

LAST November Britain's minister for Europe, Denis MacShane, unleashed
his notoriously sharp tongue on the nation's 1.6m Muslims: they must
choose between th e or th e. Muslim leaders hit back furiously,
calling the ministe r and tartly urging him to address th e such as
the woes of Iraq and the Palestinians. Mr MacShane's apology fo r was
brushed aside.

This week, as warnings of a possible attack on Britain by Islamists
reached a crescendo, there were signs that things had changed. The
government and Muslim leaders have apparently decided to put aside
their differences and work together against the danger of terrorist
attacks while there is still a chance.


On March 30th, London's Metropolitan Police announced that a huge
anti-terrorist operation, involving more than 700 officers from five
regions of southern England as well as their spookier colleagues, had
just taken place. Eight British citizens, aged between 17 and 32, had
been arrested on suspicion of involvement with terrorism, and half a
tonne of ammonium nitrate fertiliserrepublican terrorism, nor were
those held suspects in the Madrid bombings. It thus implied that they
were British-born Muslims planning big operations against soft targets
terrorist threa.t

Although its release was accelerated because of the anti-terror swoop,
the Muslim statement had been in the works since the previous
Friday. Some of Britain's top clerics and community leaders held an
emergency gathering at the Regent's Park Mosque in London prompted by
the Madrid bombings, and by much depressing talk, including a forecast
by Sir John Stevens, London's police chief, that an attack on Britain
wa s.

Seen in the light of the council's previous grumpiness towards the
police and the government, this statement marks a big
change. According to insiders, several people at the mosque discussion
argue d that Muslims must overcome any qualms about working with the
police; and nobody disagreed. The council is now drafting a longer
booklet that will urge Muslims to appreciate the freedoms they enjoy
in Britain, and to act as responsible citizens; and Imam Abduljalil
Sajid, a Brighton-based cleric, will be sending a n sermon to be read
out in mosques all over the country.

But if the clerics are to rid British Islam of sympathy for terrorism,
they have a long way to go. An ICM opinion poll for the Guardian in
early March found that 13% of Muslims would regard further attacks on
America by al-Qaeda, or similar groups, a s, compared with 73% who
thought the contrary. Some 64% thought that Britain's anti-terrorist
laws were being enforced unfairly. Taken at face value, that would
imply up to 200,000 potential sympathisers with anti-western
mega-terroromist 
