Chaotic computing 

Logic from chaos?

Apr 1st 2004 | MONTREAL 
From The Economist print edition


Another novel technique

QUANTUM computing (see article) is not the only game in town when it
comes to creating a new computing paradigm. Speaking at the American
Physical Society's annual March conference, William Ditto of the
University of Florida told of his efforts to create  a. This is saner
than it sounds. Chaos, in the mathematical sense, is not
unpredictability: chaotic systems can behave in a predictable and
reproducible way. The catch is that the evolution of a chaotic system
depends very sensitively on its starting conditions, which leads in
the long term to behaviour that is ultimately unpredictable. But by
choosing those starting conditions carefully, and only letting the
system evolve for a short time, Dr Ditto thinks he can harness chaos
to be computationally powerful.

Dr Ditto proposes usin gtute of Mathematical Sciences in Chennai,
India, had a key insight. They showed that given a carefully chosen
chaotic logic element, different logical operations (such as AND, OR
and so on) can be performed simply by varying the threshold
value. This would allow a matrix of chaotic logic elements to be
simply and dynamically reprogrammed by changing their threshold
values. That, in turn, would be useful in reconfigurable
circuits. Unlike reconfigurable circuits which already exist today,
and are used, for example, in prototyping, a chaotic computer, Dr
Ditto says, could be reconfigured so rapidly that it could perform
entirely different functions with each tick of the clock. This would
be not only a quantitative, but a qualitative change from conventional
computers.

But it is also just a starting point, because there are chaotic
systems that have many different parameters that depend on one
another. By cleverly designing the inputs, outputs and thresholds,
such a system can perform many different logical operations
simultaneously offering, in the long run, the possibility of
performing calculations far more quickly than conventional logic
elements can. Dr Ditto described just how this might be done.

The theory is intriguing, but these circuits are not just
theoretical. The team has built an electronic logic element using a
collection of simple components, such as resistors and capacitors,
which behaves chaotically. They have also made a logic element out of
a pair of leech neurons (nerve cells from blood-sucking worms) placed
on a microchip. Dr Ditto readily admits that, like quantum computing,
this technology is still in its infancy. But it certainly has
potential though many people feel that existing computers are quite
chaotic enough already.



