The talking cures 

Shrink to fit

Apr 1st 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Brief therapies have the edge in an expanding market

IF PSYCHOANALYSTS were not so well adjusted, they would be gripped by
anxiety. Although their brand remains strongorse, a wave of
retirements looms: the 500 members of the Institute of Psychoanalysis
have an average age of 65.

Of the many upstart groups muscling in on the therapy trade, two are
faring particularly well. Integrative psychotherapists combine austere
continental theories with a cuddly demeanour in the consulting
room. Cognitive and behavioural therapists try to short-circuit
destructive thought patterns. Both eschew long, horizontal
self-explorations in favour of briefer, less mysterious
treatments. Psychologically, as Phillip Hodson, of the British
Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy, puts it ,


Demand for the lighter talking cures is strong, accounting for much of
the growth in provision. Andrew Samuels, a Jungian analyst who teaches
at the University of Essex's Centre for Psychoanalytic Studies, says
that the assertive, information-seeking consumer so beloved of
health-care reformers is already a fixture in the consulting room. The
newer treatments, which tend to promise improvement after a fixed
number of sessions, appeal to picky customers; the older ones do not.

Supply is part of the story, too. In general, the more exalted the
therapy, the longer and more expensive the training. At the top end,
psychoanalytic trainees must pay for years of thrice- or five times
weekly analysis before being let loose on someone else's
subconscious. Humanistic therapists, by contrast, can get away with a
weekly chat. When the superiority of psychoanalysis was taken for
granted, the harder route seemed worthwhile; now it seems like
masochism. 

It may be, though, that the public health-care system exerts the
strongest influence on the market. In the past 30 years, the NHS has
come to rely increasingly heavily on cognitive and behavioural
therapy, which is brief and (more importantly) good at proving its own
effectiveness. Over the years, the health service has nurtured a
growing army of practitioners, who are now muscling in on the
lucrative market for wealthy phobics and depressives. The British
Association for Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapies, which has
grown from 200 members in 1972 to 5,500 today, reports that
four-fifths of accredited members now see private patients.

Psychoanalysts and their therapeutic fellow travellers have been left
flat-footed by the competition. But there are signs that they are
getting their act together. Those who remain in the health service are
concentrating on the most difficult cases: young, suicidal people who
seem to respond neither to brief, light-touch treatment nor to
drugs. For a profession associated with an exclusive clientele, this
may seem an odd departure. But it is how Freud and his disciples
started out.



 

