Wall Street 

The golden spigot

Apr 1st 2004 | NEW YORK 
From The Economist print edition


Good times are back for investment banks and their bosses

RECALL, if you can, the dark days when Wall Street was under
siege. Business was drying up, investment bankers and analysts were
being cast out of work and the top executives of the Street's leading
firms were hanging on to their jobs (and their freedom) by their
fingernails. Recall, if you can, last year. Because everything has
changed.

Well, almost everything. Barely a week passes without another legal
settlement. On March 30th the five largest specialist trading-firms on
the floor of the New York Stock Exchange concluded negotiations with
regulators over accusations that they had profited at the expense of
their customers. They will pay fines and recompense of $242m. Large as
this sum is, it pales against the $3.2 billion earned in the fourth
quarter of 2003 by the exchange's member firms. It was the best
showing since 1999. For the big firms, it seems, such settlements have
become merely a manageable cost of doing business.


Last year, shareholders in leading firms did correspondingly well),
needed to guide their firms through the recent rocky times. There is
no mention of the same leaders' failure to keep regulators away from
their firms' doors.

The bosses did, however, make the right choices: they kept what made
money and got rid of everything else. Pay typically accounts for half
a Wall Street firm's revenues, twice the proportion in
manufacturing. So tens of thousands of employees were fired. Others
had their pay slashed. Bankers who merely processed work rather than
bringing it in were replaced by younger, cheaper and less jaded
business-school graduates. Research was cut back, following the
scandal about the conflict of interest between the appraisal of
equities and investment banking; many of the most experienced analysts
departed for hedge funds.

Although some businesses struggled, conditions for making money were
not universally hard. The Federal Reserve's cheap-money policy and the
subsequent powerful rebound in the American economy, which reduced
debt defaults, provided an ideal environment for bond underwriting and
trading. This benefited Citigroup, Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers
especially. It is often said that genius on Wall Street is a bull
market, and the top executives of all three firms were lavishly
rewarded.

As the broader markets have improved, lay-offs have ceased and
headhunters have once again been on the prowl. To be a banker or
broker with appreciative clients, or a derivatives trader with an
expertise in financial modelling, or even (amazingly) a security
analyst with a following is to be in demand again. The largest gains
in compensation, however, have come in an area where there is no
evidence of increased demand or tight supply: the market for chief
executives.



Bouncing bonuses
Top bosses' pay dipped with profits in the past couple of
yearsents. One thing about them is plain, though: they are
huge. Citigroup estimates the earnings in 2003 of Sandy Weill, who
stood down as chief executive in the autumn, at $45m; Bear Stearns
values its chief executive's compensation at $39m; at Merrill Lynch,
the corresponding figure is $28m; at Lehman Brothers, it is $23m; at
Goldman Sachs, $21m; and at Morgan Stanley, $14m.

According to Mr Crystal, more accurate figures may be a bit higher. He
puts the value of Mr Weill's compensation at $54m, the tab for Bear
Stearns at $40m, and for Morgan Stanley at $16m. A big source of the
discrepancy in valuation is the method of appraising stock
options. Citigroup, for example, takes the unusual step of discounting
the amount derived through a standard option-pricing model by
one-quarter, in order to reflect the cost of protecting the options'
value. You might ask whether this protection does not undermine the
options' incentive effect.

Meanwhile, Charles Prince, who has succeeded Mr Weill as chief
executive, received a restricted stock-grant worth $15m as a retention
bonus. It may be surprising that one needed to be paid, given that Mr
Prince was an internal appointee. In any case, it is hard to imagine
that he would leave so soon after accepting the top job.

Most of the firms say in their proxies that in arriving at
compensation agreements they use comparisons with one another. This
suggests that compensation rises in something like lockstep. It also
makes the economic rationale of chief executives as a group hard to
fathom.

The stockmarket itself seems to have come to terms with the high
compensation demands of securities firms by valuing them at a sharp
discount to the market average, concludes Ira Kay, a compensation
consultant at Watson Wyatt. By paying out so much of their earnings to
their employees, investment banks are, in effect, always in the
process of going private. For the chief beneficiaries, life at the
moment is good.
