Western Canada 

The great divide

Apr 1st 2004 | VANCOUVER 
From The Economist print edition


Can western Canada and Ottawa learn to love each other?

WHEN British Columbia joined the new Dominion of Canada in 1871, it
was promised a transcontinental rail link to the Atlantic by 1883. The
railway was built late, and only after the territory threatened to
secede. Ever since, western Canada has tended to regard itself as a
resource-rich colony, exploited by the more developed and populous
east: over-taxed, and neglected by the federal parliament and its
spending programmes. Notwithstanding the contempt with which
westerners have historically viewed his Liberal Party, Paul Martin,
prime minister since December, has vowed to address this rancour
across the Rockies. Unfortunately for him, a scandal has endorsed the
worst western fears about eastern politicians.

Easterners like Mr Martin often dismiss western grievances as the
grumbling of fat-cat British Columbians and Albertans, or of glum
Saskatchewan and Manitoba farmers. But the evidence for what
sociologists cal l is compelling. The Canada West Foundation (CWF), a
think-tank, last year reported  a among westerners tha t Last month a
CWF poll found that 64.7% of westerners felt their province's
interests were poorly or very poorly represented at the federal level.

Unusually for a Canadian prime minister, Mr Martin acknowledges that
the syndrome exists. He gave the two top jobs in his cabinet to
westerners, and says he wants to co-operate more closely with
provincial premiers. Responding to noisy opinion in Alberta, he has
agreed to consider replacing the archaic, appointed Canadian Senate
with an elected body that might better represent regional
interests. Putting his money where his mouth was, he last week
announced a generous C$995m ($750m) federal bail-out for (mainly
western) cattle producers hit by last year's mad-cow scare.

Mr Martin claims that the cash is motivated by need, not by
politics. Perhaps. Canadian elections tend to be decided in populous
Ontario and Quebec, which together command most of the parliamentary
seats. Hence all the attention governments lavish on them. But the
Canadian right is now re-united under the Conservative Partyt once
again, as Phil Resnick of the University of British Columbia puts it ,



 