Research and development 

Innovative India

Apr 1st 2004 | BANGALORE AND DELHI 
From The Economist print edition


AFP 
 

Please don't call it outsourcing

UNDERSTANDABLY, many Indians take umbrage at the wave of protectionist
rhetoric engulfing the American election campaign. Not only do they
point to the endless lectures they have received from Americans in
years past on the benefits of globalisation and open markets. They
also resent an insinuation underlying the debate ove r: that all
countries such as India have to offer is cheap labour and a
telecommunications link. Just look, they say, at the extent of the
high-end research and development (R&D) work being undertaken in
India.

Or, rather, they say so in private. In public, conscious of western
fears of the migration of ever more technically demanding and
high-paid jobs, many Indians have recently concluded that the best
strategy is not to draw attention to themselves. The ultimate American
nightmare is not just about white-collar employment, but the loss of
the country's great international advantage: the ability to
innovate. So a veil of discretion is masking some of India's R&D
achievements. Industry lobbyists are playing down this aspect of
India's success. Some multinationals, such as IBM, are loth to discuss
it at all. Others, such as Texas Instruments, boast that the y, but
make sure to add tha t. Indian IT firms are stressing that, great as
their contributions are, the real cutting-edge, innovative work is
done in their clients' laboratories in America. 

Some veterans of the Indian technology industry are truly sceptical
about the potential of Indian R&D. Lakshmi Narayanan, chief executive
of Cognizant, a New Jersey-based IT-services firm with big operations
in India, argues that the country does not yet have the capability to
develop its own intellectual property. So far, he says, R&D's
contribution to overall growth i s, and where multinationals, such as
Cisco Systems and Nortel, have contracted work out to Indian services
firms it has been in upgrading old products, not developing new
lines. Satyam Cherukuri of Sarnoff, an American R&D firm, argues that,
of the three requirements for developing an innovation-driven
industry, India has two: the technical skills and access to
capital. What is missing is an indigenous business model.



Patently obvious
 
 
 

 
Yet by the crude measure of patents earned by the Indian subsidiaries
of multinational firms (see chart), a significant amount of innovation
now stems from India. Last year, Intel's Indian subsidiary filed for
63 patents. Its president, Ketan Sampat, says that the 1,500 IT
professionals employed by the firm in R&D in Bangalore are engaged i n
They use the fastest supercomputer in India (ranked as the 109th-most
powerful computer in the world) and are divided into four
product-design divisions covering ultra-wideband radio, enterprise
processors, mobile and wireless chip-sets, and communications.

For Intel, which has a similar-sized R&D operation in Israel, and
smaller facilities in Russia and China, the attractions of Bangalore
are simple: the best climate in India an d, who are technically
well-educated and speak good English. D.B. Inamdar, the senior civil
servant in the provincial government's IT department, says that some
140,000 IT professionals now work in Bangalorejects.

Wipro's boss, Vivek Paul, says that R&D is becomin g. Firms, like film
studios, are increasingly unwilling to keep expensive teams together
between projects. For Wipro, providing firms with an alternative to
doing R&D with permanent in-house teams has become a big business,
accounting for one third of its $1 billion in annual revenues, and
employing 6,500 people. It is probably the world's biggest
R&D-services firm.

Its customers include all the big telecoms-equipment vendors (except
Germany's Siemens). Its smallest commitment to any of these clients is
300 people. Elaborate procedures protect the customer's intellectual
property, including mandator y periods for engineers between clients,
and sometimes a right of veto on their redeployment. The corollary is
that the breadth of industry knowledge is part of the sales pitch.

The approach, says Mr Paul, varies from micro-management by the
customer, who takes on Wipro engineers virtually as members of his own
staff, t om of tactful political correctness behind the reluctance of
Indian firms and of India-based multinationals to describe their
involvement in design work a s. Nandan Nilekani, boss of Infosys,
which has a $150m-a-year R&D business, points out how much this area
differs from the outsourcing of IT and other back-office
processes. There, business is coming from cost centres, and is driven
by price and efficiency. R&D clients, however, are looking for
innovation and a shorter time to market. They hope to be profit
centres.

That does not mean the trend has no impact on jobs in the West,
however. SAP may be typical. The Indian operation has not caused a
single lay-off in Germany. But the firm's planned expansion of its R&D
capability is entirely offshore, in India and to a lesser extent
China. So if R&D jobs are not being lost in the West, they are not
being created there either.

Many firms still see untapped potential in using the wealth of Indian
talent for R&Der industries such as drugs and biotech. The long-term
worry this raises for America is what Mr Paul call s. Even if much of
the work being done in India is not at the most advanced and
sophisticated technical level, it is filling what used to be part of
the professional experience that has helped to create America's
legions of great innovators. Just as once unassailable American
corporate R&D departments have seen their sway weakened, will it be
long before America itself loses its near-monopoly of global
innovation?
