German management 

Kultur clash

Apr 1st 2004 | DUSSELDORF 
From The Economist print edition


Mannesmann, Infineon and the troubles of corporate Germany

AFTER ten fruitless weeks, prosecutors in the Mannesmann trial are
licking their wounds. On March 31st, Brigitte Koppenhvfer, the leading
judge, said that so far, in the opinion of the Dusseldorf court, there
had been breaches of German securities law, but none serious enough to
convict any defendant of a criminal breach of trust. The case goes on,
but defence lawyers are confident that no evidence will emerge to
change the court's mind.

AP 
 
 
Fans of management by consensus
 
The trial, billed as the most spectacular in German corporate history,
concerns extra bonuses paid to Mannesmann's senior managers after its
180 billion ($177 billion) takeover by Vodafone in February 2000. Six
former Mannesmann officials, including Josef Ackermann, the chief
executive of Deutsche Bank, are accused of committing or abetting a
breach of trust in awarding bonuses worth 57m.

At issue are the level of the bonuses, the sloppy way in which the
paperwork was done, and exactly who instigated the payments and
why. The German public sees this as corporate greed on trial. The
prosecutors have tried to suggest that the payments were bribes to
secure the biggest hostile takeover in history.

Klaus Esser, a former chief executive of Mannesmann, one of the
accused and a lawyer by training, would like the court now to
establish exactly how bonuses should be awarded. Firms in German y, he
said this week. Mr Ackermann and his bank have most to gain from
exoneration from criminal liability. If convicted, he would have
stepped down, probably leaving a leadership vacuum.

The case has highlighted the clash in Germany between two business
cultures: the increasingly imported practices of Anglo-Saxon
capitalism, and those of the more socially-oriented Rhineland
variety. Big German firms have traditionally been run by consensus: a
German executive board has no real chief, in the American sense. Each
executive is answerable directly to the supervisory board.

Although there have been moves in the American direction in some
German executive suites, there are powerful opposing forces, as Ulrich
Schumacher, the flamboyant, American-style boss of Infineon, a
semiconductor firm, found out last week when he was abruptly ousted by
his supervisory board. Mr Schumacher famously launched the firm's
initial public offering in 2000 dressed as a motor-racing driver. He
later irritated trade unionists and worker representatives with his
repeated threats to relocate the Munich-based firm to Switzerland. He
was said to lecture his own executive s. 

By contrast, some top German managers, who in America or Britain might
have been ousted for poor performance, are still at the helm because
they play the consensus game: J|rgen Schrempp, head of loss-making
DaimlerChrysler, who remains in charge despite the ill-fated merger
with Chrysler; or Klaus-Peter M|ller, head of Commerzbank, who has cut
his bank to the bone but failed to make it profitable. 

Play that game well as a company's boss and the next job may be to
head its supervisory board. Rolf Breuer at Deutsche Bank, Martin
Kohlhaussen at Commerzbank and Albrecht Schmidt at HVB Group all took
that path, despite poor performance and in defiance of the Cromme
commission on corporate governance. It expressed concern in a report
published in 2002 about executives of a company later going on to its
supervisory board. (The commission chairman, Gerhard Cromme, a former
chief executive, and now supervisory board chairman, of ThyssenKrupp
clearly does not think that this concern applies to him either.)

If the failure to achieve criminal convictions in the Mannesmann trial
advances the cause of Anglo-American management practices in Germany,
it should also underline the importance of doing them well. The
supervisory board of Mannesmann has been revealed as unGermanically
sloppy, committing all manner of bureaucratic mistakes in the process
of awarding compensation. Adding American methods to traditional
German business strengths may be a better strategy.

