George Bush's credibility 

A matter of trust 

Apr 1st 2004 | WASHINGTON, DC 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

Evidence is growing that the Bush administration has misled the
public. But most voters, so far, are inclined to forgive

Get article background

GEORGE BUSH ran for president in 2000 promising to raise the tone of
debate in Washington. He was not saying merely that he wouldn't have
sex with interns. He was talking about basic honesty, promising to
look facts in the face, not to spin (too much), not to make policy by
opinion polls, and to give an honest accounting of his actions. He
reiterated that position last month in an interview :

Yet the administration's reaction to accusations by Richard Clarke,
its former counter-terrorism co-ordinator, raises doubts not only over
its judgments but, still more, over whether and how the administration
accounts for its decisions. When set in the context of the failure to
find weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and the ballooning budget
deficit, this reaction raises profound questions about the
administration's credibility, honesty and competence.

Mr Clarke argued, in testimony to the special commission investigating
the terrorist attacks of 2001, that terrorism was not a top priority
before September 11th. The administration, he claimed, had failed to
do as much as it could and should have done to disrupt the threat of
global Islamic terrorism in its first eight months. In his book, he
argued that the reason for the neglect was that the administration was
distracted by its obsession with Iraqecause they challenge the
performance of America's intelligence services and raise questions
about whether war in Iraq was justified. And, on the substance, the
administration's case in its own defence should and could have been
better than it appeared. 

It could, for example, have stressed that it was seeking a more
ambitious strategy against terrorists than the one inherited from the
Clinton administration, which Mr Bush calle d. In fact, a new,
slightly more aggressive strategy emerged a week before the attacks,
but too late. It could have pointed out, as Mr Clarke conceded, that
even had it done everything Mr Clarke wanted, it probably could not
have stopped the September attacks. Mr Bush could have acknowledged
(as he had done earlier) that he had underestimated the threat from
al-Qaeda before September 11th, but that afterwards he pursued the war
on terror to the utmost extent. And he could have reminded everyone
that, in 2001, Iraqi terrorism was a legitimate concern, if not a
large one.

But to have done all this would have required acknowledging at least
part of Mr Clarke's complaints. And that the administration was
unwilling to do. It was still insisting that it had done everything it
could have done before the attacks. So instead of treating the
criticisms seriously, and replying to them seriously, the
administration, with one or two honourable exceptions, began a
campaign to discredit Mr Clarke. 

Dick Cheney, the vice-president, suggested that he was doing it in
revenge for not getting a promotion. He claimed Mr Clarke was out of
the loop, a charge almost instantly contradicted by Condoleezza Rice,
the national security adviser. The White House's press spokesman
claimed Mr Clarke was doing it for both commercial and partisan
reasons. (He is a friend of John Kerry's chief foreign-policy adviser,
Rand Beers, who succeeded Mr Clarke in his counter-terrorism job
before leaving for the Kerry campaign.) The nadir came when the leader
of the Senate, Bill Frist of Tennessee, all but accused Mr Clarke of
perjury before the Senate. Mr Frist even criticised Mr Clarke's
apology to the victims of terrorism, saying he had neither the
privilege nor the responsibility to make such a statement. But no one
else from the administration has risen to that responsibility at all. 

It has to be conceded that the administration's attacks are not made
up from scratch. Mr Clarke had previously lauded the Bush
administration's anti-terror policies before the attacks in
off-the-record briefings, something he now dismisses a s. His accounts
of the episode in which Mr Bush urged him, the day after the al-Qaeda
attacks, to look into possible Iraqi connections vary a little:
sometimes he describes Mr Bush's manner as intimidating, sometimes
not. The White House has claimed that, just before the invasion of
Iraq, Mr Clarke met Ms Rice but did not raise his worries that such an
action would harm the war on terror. 



Wilful inattention?
It might also be argued that the administration, in attacking Mr
Clarke, was merely responding in kind to the personal criticisms that
Mr Clarke himself had levelled at its members. For instance, he
implied that Ms Rice had never heard of al-Qaeda before he briefed her
in her early days in office, whereas in fact she had given speeches
about the threat of al-Qaeda long before. 

 
 
 

 
Yet when all is said and done, Mr Clarke was the administration's
first crisis manager on September 11th, directing emergency responses
from the White House itself that day. He had presented Ms Rice with a
memo urging the administratio n This came one week before September
11th. And even if he had not been a prescient participant in much of
the debate on terrorism within the White House, his arguments would
still have merited better answers than they receivedports corroborate
his charge that proposals to resume unmanned Predator drone flights in
Afghanistan were discussed only in desultory fashion at a lower level
of the administration throughout 2001, while th e (cabinet-level
officers) were discussing other matters, such as Russia, Iraq and the
Middle East. The Army War College argued that by attacking Iraq , and
that this was don e

That does not necessarily make the arguments against Mr Bush true. But
as a philosopher, Sidney Hook, once said , The administration did not
do this. Instead, by seeking to demean Mr Clarke, it neglected the
questions he raised. Even to those who agree with the policies in the
war on terror, this should be worrying.

More worrying still, the Clarke affair has a pattern : With the
notable exception of Richard Armitage, the deputy secretary of state,
the administration has refused to acknowledge even obvious
shortcomings, such as its slowness in formulating a new
counter-terrorism policy. It has not shifted its basic claimessly to
an unchanging line in radically changed circumstances. It argued that
the tax cut of 2001 was justified because there was a large
surplus. It argued that the tax cut of 2003 was justified even though
there was a large deficit. It argued that war in Iraq was justified
because Iraq's weapons of mass destruction threatened the United
States. It argued that war was justified even when it failed to find
those weapons.

This is not to assert that the policies were conclusively wrong,
though many have argued as much. In both cases, the administration
could still defend and justify its actions in different ways. It has
claimed, for example, that tax cuts were right because they encouraged
economic growth. It has justified war in Iraq variously as an integral
part of the global war on terror, on humanitarian grounds, and as a
first step towards the democratisation of the Middle East. And, of
course, tax cuts and the Iraq war could also be disputed, as well as
defended, on any or all of these grounds. 

But some of these arguments are undeniably internally
inconsistent. For example, if temporary tax cuts have spurred economic
growth, why should they be made permanent, as the administration
wants? Or if forecasts of vast budget deficits are bogus now (as the
administration says), why did Mr Bush justify the 2001 cut on
predictions of large surpluses? 



Digging in
More important, in both cases, the administration has not engaged in
any serious debate about the implications for its original arguments
of changed circumstances. Rather, it has simply waved objections aside
and restated its position. Paul O'Neill, Mr Bush's first treasury
secretary, memorably quoted Mr Cheney as writing off the significance
of budget deficits altogether : In similar vein, Mr Bush dismissed the
idea that the absence of WMD had any implications for perceptions of
the Iraqi security threat ., he asked a television interviewer
rhetorically last December, between Saddam actually possessing WMD and
his moving to acquire them? The idea that the absence of WMD is
insignificant sits oddly with the administration's earlier claims that
the existence of the weapons was vital. 

When justifying policies on both Iraq and tax cuts, the
administration's case has been riddled with errors. Obviously, the
most egregious concern Iraq's WMD. Henry Waxman, a Democratic
congressman, has gathered no fewer than 237 exaggerated or dubious
claims by senior administration membersam had WMD, and was sceptical
of the few words of caution that the CIA and others managed to
interject. On March 30th, the new chief American weapons inspector for
Iraq talked o f about WMD but gave little idea what it was, beyond
evidence of a general Iraqi capability to produce such weapons.

In the case of the deficit, the budget mis-statements cannot even be
excused on the grounds of simple error. Mr Bush's budget statements
have routinely assumed future spending restraints that few in Congress
or the administration believe will happen. In forecasting future
deficits, he has assumed revenue increases from taxes he is seeking to
repeal (such as the so-called Alternative Minimum Tax). And as Mr
O'Neill argued, the White House was wrong when it claimed, in 2001,
that it could not use the budget surplus to pay off the federal debt
beyond a certain point. All these are cases where the administration
should surely have known better.

There have been a few specific instances of stepping nearhaps even
overy believed, had passed that estimate on to the White House and the
Office of Management and Budget. But they did not pass it to Congress
because, says a whistle-blower, the then Medicare administrator
threatened to fire the chief analyst if he told legislators the higher
estimate. There was legal justification for this, and the
administrator denies making threats of dismissal. But the episode
still looks disturbingly like a case of the administration
manipulating federal accounting standards for political ends. 



Lies, or principle?
On both Iraq and the budget, the administration has unloaded its
heaviest ammunition against critics who formerly worked for it. John
DiIulio, who was brought into the White House to implement Mr Bush' s,
was told to retract his criticism that the administration lacked a
proper policy shop for evaluating facts and arguments
impartially. Paul O'Neill, who repeated that criticism in a book,
found himself on the receiving end of a barrage of personal abuse. And
when Joe Wilson, who had investigated the claims about yellowcake
uranium, contradicted Mr Bush's assertion that there had been a deal,
someonepin and interpretation of America' s. Message control and
winning each 24-hour news cycle have usurped the place of substantive
debate. The Clinton administration was accused of similar lies and
half-truths. It is as much the product of a political culture as of
any one president, and Mr Bush's ambition to buck the trend has
failed.

The administration came into office convinced that, under Mr Clinton,
too much accountability to Congress had hampered effective
government. Its members have therefore tried to re-assert executive
privilege. Some of their attempts to keep Congress in the dark are
rooted in this view, rather than in perfidy and secrecy.

Lastly, many of thes e have a curious quality: they tend to confirm
the popular view of the president's temperament and beliefs. Usually,
distortions suggest that the person responsible is putting on an act
or is somehow different from what he pretends to be. Yet, at least in
foreign policy, the administration's errors and misrepresentations all
tend to confirm the president's image as a man uncompromising in his
determination to fight the war on terror as he conceives it (at least
after September 2001), and willing to ride roughshod over critics and
nuanced intelligence alike to get his way. 

And that in turn may explain one of the most surprising features of
the past two weeks: that despite all the controversy over Mr Bush's
honesty, credibility and competence, his position in the opinion polls
has remained resilient. In several polls he has regained a narrow lead
over Mr Kerry, and 50% of voters say they are more likely to vote for
him because of his actions in the war on terror compared with just 28%
for his rival.

Admittedly, the margin on the latter question was even greater two
months ago, and more people now think the war in Iraq has increased
the likelihood of another terrorist attack than think it has reduced
it. Still, worries about Mr Bush do not yet seem to be translating
into potential votes for Mr Kerry. It is as if voters, faced with the
president's lack of straight dealing, are concluding that truth may
indeed be the first casualty of the war they want to win. 


 
 

