Face value 

Desperate embrace

Apr 7th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


AP 
 
 

 

Did Scott McNealy of Sun just make peace with an enemy, surrender, or
cry for help?

TO GEEKS everywhere, it was as momentous as, say, the Rabin-Arafat
handshake once looked to normal peopleracing, and swapping Detroit Red
Wings hockey jerseys with, Steve Ballmer (right), the boss of
Microsoft, the Redmond-based software giant that, in the Valley's
popularity polls, runs neck-and-neck with the antichrist. 

Mr McNealy used to refer to Microsoft as th e and th e. He described
its pervasive Windows operating system a s, and Mr Ballmer, its chief
executive, and Bill Gates, its chairman, a s. Yet Messrs McNealy and
Ballmer have now divulged that they have secretly been golf buddies
for the past year, rekindling the friendship they had felt deep inside
ever since their shared youth in suburban Detroit, and later at
Harvard and Stanford. 

How heart-warming. But what, exactly, has happened? In short, the two
enemies have agreed to bury the hatchet. Microsoft will pay Sun almost
$2 billion to settle Sun's pending antitrust lawsuit against it, to
resolve patent issues and to pay in advance for some licensing
royalties. For Microsoft, which has some $53 billion in cash, this is
peanuts. For Sun, whose credit rating was cut to junk last month by
Standard & Poor's, it is most welcome. Longer term, the two firms have
agreed to make their technologies compatible and, more generally, to
play nice. 

Their official reason for this about-turn certainly contains some of
the truth. Large companies invariably have in their data-centres both
Sun's fancy network-server computers and also cheaper machines running
Windows. And they all have Windows on their employees' desktop
computers. These need to talk smoothly to all the servers in the
basement, but often do not. So customers are increasingly annoyed at
the complexity of making the various technologies work together. Every
client he meets, says Mr McNealy, tells him t o Mr Ballmer chimes in :

Customers, however, have been annoyed for many years, so it must have
taken something else for the two arch-rivals to make peace now. For
Microsoft, it is a desire to clean up, wherever possible, its legal
messes of the past. This is why, last May, it settled a suit by Time
Warner, which owns the remains of Netscape, a web-browser firm that
Microsoft bulldozed in the 1990s. Microsoft would love to come to a
similar deal with the European Commission, which last month ruled
against the firm, and with RealNetworks, another software rival that
is suing it. 

More importantly, Microsoft and Sun have a new common enemy: Linux, an
operating system that competes with Windows and with Sun's Solaris but
which, unlike the other two, is written by volunteers and shared
freely among all who want to download and use it. When Mr Ballmer
gives Mr McNealy a hug and says tha t, this is a not-so-veiled jab at
the open-source Linux, which both men consider, in essence,
communistic. Microsoft and Sun happen to be the only major backers (in
the form of licence payments) of Linux's gadfly, a firm called SCO,
which is trying to obtain money from Linux users with threats of
litigation. 

Linux, however, is hurting Sun far more than Microsoft. Solaris is
similar to Linux, which makes it very easy for customers to switch
from one to the other. Migrating from Windows to Linux is a much more
fiddly process. As a result, the technology bosses of companies, whose
budgets have been tight since the dotcom bust, are ditching Sun's
computer systems, the equivalent of Ferraris, for cheaper boxes from
Dell, Hewlett-Packard or IBM that run Linux, the equivalent of Fiats.

Sun, in other words, is the main loser. Its revenues have shrunk,
year-on-year, for 12 quarters in a row, and it has been making losses
since 2002. Buried under the headlines about the love-in with
Microsoft on April 2nd was Sun's announcement that the latest
quarter's losses are likely to be $750m-810md, Microsoft, remains, in
effect, a monopoly on the desktop and continues to reap monopoly
rents, Sun is fighting for its very survival, or at least its
independence. (Indeed, there has been talk that the new friendship may
be a prelude to Microsoft buying Sun, though this seems unlikely.)



All dressed up and nowhere to go
This is the backdrop to Mr McNealy's sporadic, and admittedly
entertaining, antics. In 2002, he mounted a stage dressed from head to
toe as a penguin (the Linux mascot). He was hoping to convince
investors that Sun had now embraced Linux. It does now ship some cheap
Linux servers, but this is surely a token gesture, for sales of
low-end boxes cannibalise Sun's core high-end business. Now it is Red
Wings jerseys. There will be more. 

These photo-ops, however, cannot change Mr McNealy's predicament. He
must transform Sun radically, but into what sort of company? He has
already cut over $1 billion in costs since the tech-bubble burst in
2000. And, after a series of top-level defections, he now has a new
management team. The latest promotion, also on April 2nd, was that of
Jonathan Schwartz, Sun's talented software visionary, to the
number-two slot. 

Mr Schwartz is thought to have persuaded Mr McNealy that Sun must
become a software company. Mr Schwartz's dream is to sell
deep-discount desktop computers at Wal-Mart, carrying Sun's office
applications on top of a Linux operating system. But this would put
Sun and Mr McNealy right back where they first ran into trouble, years
ago: in Microsoft's way. 

