Bagehot 

The right thing, the wrong way

Apr 7th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


The government's immigration policy is in a mess. It has only itself
to blame

PERHAPS Tony Blair's hastily convened Downing Stree t on asylum and
immigration policy, held on Tuesday in the wake of last week's
ministerial resignation and a swathe of further embarrassing newspaper
revelations, will serve some useful purpose. It might at least
persuade officials at the Home and Foreign Offices that communicating
with each other occasionally would help them in their undoubtedly
difficult jobs. What it won't do is restore public confidence or
rescue the government from the twin charges of ineptitude and
duplicity. 

How many of the allegations made in the last few weeks are true in
their entirety has yet to be established. The latest (and one of the
most politically damaging because it directly implicates the prime
minister) is that Mr Blair connived with his Romanian counterpart to
waive visas for Romanians coming to Britain as a way of reducing
asylum applications. This could have been seen as a necessity after Mr
Blair's promise early last year to halve the number within six
months. It sounds credible because Britain has said it will lift visa
restrictions early for European Union (EU) applicant countries if they
meet certain conditions. But there is no hard evidence, and both
Downing Street and the Romanians have rebuffed all suggestions of a
deal. 

Whatever the facts, most people, to the extent they are paying
attention, will conclude that official policy was indeed being
subverted by a nod and a wink. Government denials are of limited use
because they fly in the face of two wider truths. The first is that
the government has form when it comes to the manipulation of targets:
once Mr Blair had announced a target for asylum applicants, it was
bound to be met no matter what. The second is that ministers are
suspected of being quite happy to see armies of industrious east
Europeans arriving to help fuel Britain's successful and flexible
economy: if several thousand Romanians arrive here a few years earlier
than otherwise, no great harm will have been done, it is thought.

The government's difficulties stem from the fact that, when it comes
to immigration, at some point its brain and its gut became fatally
parted. As immigration raced up the list of voter concerns, its gut
told it to be very afraid. Race riots in the north of England in the
summer of 2001, growing anxiety about Islamic cultural separateness
following September 11th and, above all, the explosion in the number
of asylum-seekers (usually seen a s) in the late 1990s formed a potent
cocktail happily stirred by the popular press. The asylum system
itself made things worse. By preventing refugees from working and
forcing them into benefit dependency, it helped feed the prejudice
that most migrants were cheats and scroungers. No wonder Mr Blair
wanted to be seen to be doing something about it. 

However, as the number of asylum-seekers began to decline in the
latter half of last year (thanks in some degree to the prime
minister's magic wand, but also because of a general reduction across
the EU caused by a mix of tougher controls and regime change in
Afghanistan and Iraq) attention and headlines have switched to other
forms of immigration. Whereas the government could always claim to be
doing its inefficient best to prevent abuse of the asylum system, th e
line doesn't wash if there has, in effect, been an unannounced policy
to allow in much larger numbers of people than hitherto from outside
the European Economic Area (EEA), which is the EU plus other rich
European countries. 

And that is certainly what even the inadequate official statistics
indicate. From 1982 to 1997 (when Labour was elected), the number of
non-EEA migrants granted settlement was almost flat at 50,000-60,000 a
year. But by 2000, this had more than doubled (recognised
asylum-seekers representing only about a quarter of the total) and
there has been little let-up since. Various programmes to attract
foreign workers have been either set up or expanded. While many of
these are classified as temporary workers or students, a large number
will become permanent settlers and eventually citizens. Add to these
the expected arrivals from the EU accession countries later this year
(who will be allowed to work in Britain immediately, a right almost
all other EU members have delayed), plus the apparent willingness to
smooth the way for Bulgarians and Romanians who are not yet even in
the union, and the overall numbers look quite large. 



A question of consent
The government's brain is, however, confident that this is wholly in
Britain's economic interests. Many migrants have skills that are in
high demandt has carried through an important policy that affects the
lives of many citizens, but without having adequately gained their
consent. The tragic consequence is that when it now argues perfectly
sensibly about the need fo r migration, it is simply not
trusted. Post-Iraq, Mr Blair likes to talk about being more interested
in doing the right thing than in being popular. If only he had said
rather sooner that this was what he was doing about immigration. 
 
 