Nepal 

Regression analysis

Apr 7th 2004 | KATMANDU 
From The Economist print edition


A triangular stand-off

Get article background

REVOLUTIONARY echoes resound around Nepal. Each day since April 1st,
five political parties have brought tens of thousands of protesters on
to the streets of the capital, Katmandu, waving flags and shouting
slogans against the king. Several hundred, including several senior
politicians, have had their heads cracked by the police. The stench of
burning tyres hangs over streets where police and protesters have
pelted each other with stones. Elsewhere, in the countryside, Maoist
guerrillas are in a particularly bloody phase of their eight-yea r, in
which more than 9,000 people have died. But neither the feudal order
nor the king himself show much sign of yielding.

The demonstrators oppos eMaoist demands for a new constitution
. declares Madhav Kumar Nepal, of the Communist Party (Unified
Marxist-Leninist), known as the UML, one of the organisers of the
protests. 

Unsurprisingly, the king disagrees. He has been touring the country
bein g by his people, many of whom regard him as an incarnation of the
god Vishnu. On March 27th, he declared tha t i s. But a family
massacre, which brought the king to power in 2001, dented the
monarchy's popularity. So have his autocratic tendencies.

He has promised elections within a year. The parties say that is
impossible under the present regime. For a start, they want the king
to sack his appointed prime minister in favour of an all-party
government. But they differ over what should happen next. The UML
wants elections. The other big party, the Nepali Congress, which is
split, opposes them.

The Maoists benefit from the stand-off. In recent weeks they have
mounted a number of big attacks on the security forces. Most observers
believe that they can neither win nor be defeated militarily. Yet they
and the king's forces fight on for propaganda advantage in case of an
eventual resumption of talks.

From April 6th, the Maoists, who say they support the parties'
protest, declared a three-day general strike in Katmandu, crippling
city life. The parties say that they remain committed to a
constitutional monarchy, whereas the rebels have just reasserted their
republican ambitions. The king, if he wants his dynasty to persist,
needs to make peace with both.



