Footballers' lives 

B*nd it like B*ckham

Apr 7th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Will reports of infidelity damage Beckham Inc?
PA 
 
 
Celebrating synergies, Beckham-style 
 
THE brands are intertwined. One is strong, the other failing and
increasingly costly to run. What to do? From a business point of view,
it has been hard for some time to see what David Beckham, Britain's
best-known footballer, gains from his marriage. He has been lonely but
successful playing football in Madrid. His wife Victoria has insisted
on staying in England with the children, vainly trying to relaunch her
flagging singing career.

Now a business conundrum has become an emotional one too. The News of
the World, Britain's largest-circulation Sunday tabloid, this week
published a steamy story about Mr Beckham's alleged dalliance with his
former personal assistant, Rebecca Loos. Supporting evidence included
a series of text-message exchanges, with the most sizzling bits
tantalisingly replaced with asterisks in a touching burst of primness
amid all the hanky-panky. 

Mr Beckham terms all thi s but stops short of outright denial. Some
commentators feign world-weary boredom: footballers and affairs go
together like dogs and lampposts. But the truth is that both
individual Beckham brands, plus the composite one, are dented and may
need relaunching.

Mr Beckham has made millions of pounds from sponsorship deals. His
pleasing face and innovative haircuts have been used to market, among
other things, a mobile phone network, a line of clothes for a
department store, sunglasses, football boots, shirts and biscuits. He
has also scored some memorable goals. He enjoys iconic status as a
devoted father and says Mr Beckham could carry the Beckham brand
independently, while Mrs Beckham would struggle.

But there is a synergy in the strategic future of the Beckham business
that makes a split unlikely. When Mr Beckham (now 28) stops playing
football, the combined brand will be the best long-term bet. Some
marital problems now will make the couple more interesting,
particularly in hard-to-crack America. Watch for them holding hands on
a talk-show couch in about 2010; all talk of *** and ****** behind
them.

