Terrorism in Europe 

Fighting back

Apr 7th 2004 | MADRID 
From The Economist print edition


The hunt for terrorists in Spain and France

 Thus the Spanish interior minister, Angel Acebes, the day after up to
 six Islamist terrorists suspected of carrying out the train bombings
 in Madrid on March 11th had blown themselves up after being cornered
 by police in a flat in the Madrid suburb of Leganis on April 3rd. Yet
 Mr Acebes's words did little to reassure Spaniards. Their mood was of
 nervous expectation, after Mr Acebes conceded that as many as three
 suspected terrorists might have escaped, possibly with explosives,
 before the police had managed to cordon off the area. 

EPA 
 
 
A terrorist lair
 


Security has been ramped up everywhere. Police patrolled the Madrid
metro for the first time, and security at airports, nuclear plants and
in Seville, where pilgrims are gathering for Easter processions, has
tightened. Last week the government said it would use the army to
guard the railways, after explosives were found on the Madrid-Seville
high-speed track. A total of 16 suspects are now in custody; 15 have
been charged, 11 of them Moroccans. 

The terrorists were tracked to the flat in Leganis thanks to their use
of pre-paid mobile-phone cards from the batch that had been used to
detonate the Madrid train bombs. But the suspects refused to give
themselves up and, as a unit of special police broke in, one man
inside detonated a huge bomb that blasted masonry and body parts
across the street. One policeman was killed. Police found 200
detonators and 10kg (22lb) of explosives in the rubble. The body of
one suspect was found in the block's empty swimming-pool, wearing an
explosive belt of the type used by Palestinian suicide-bombers.

Four corpses from the blast have so far been identified. One was
Serhane Ben Abdelmajid Fakhet, known a s and considered by the
investigating magistrate to be th e of the Madrid attacks. Another was
Jamal Ahmidan, a Moroccan nickname d o r, the suspected leader of the
bombers and one of six men for whom arrest warrants were issued the
previous week. A third, Abdennabi Kounjaa, was on that list; the
fourth, Asri Rifaat Anouar, a Moroccan, was not. Three fresh suspects
were later named.

Two days after the Leganis blast, 13 suspected members of the same
terrorist group that Spain says carried out the Madrid bombings were
arrested in France. They are suspected of involvement in the bombings
in Casablanca last May that killed 33 people (plus 12
suicide-bombers). They were not directly involved in the Madrid
bombings, said France's interior ministry. But they belonged to the
same outfit, the Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group (GICM), thought to
be behind them.

The climate of fear was increased by a letter faxed to a Spanish
newspaper, ABC, purportedly from al-Qaeda, which threatened more
attacks that woul d in Spain. The letter, signed in the name o f by
Abu Dujana al Afgani, the name used in a videotape claiming
responsibility for the train bombings, said that Spain should withdraw
its troops from Iraq and Afghanistan or fac e consequences.

In fact, the Socialist prime minister-elect, Josi Luis Rodrmguez
Zapatero, who is due to take office later this month, has promised to
honour his pre-election pledge of withdrawing the troops in Iraq
unless the UN takes charge by June 30th. To show his determination to
fight terrorism, however, he has promised to double the number of
Spanish troops (from 125) in Afghanistan. But Mr Zapatero still has
work to do to persuade Spain's allies (and enemies) not to misconstrue
the withdrawal as a victory for terrorism. Meanwhile, Spanish troops
came under attack at the Al-Andalus base near Najaf, in Iraq, the day
after the Leganis blast.


