Linux on desktop PCs 

More balls through Windows

Apr 15th 2004 | SAN FRANCISCO 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

Is Microsoft finally about to face real competition in
desktop-computer software?

Get article background

FOR years, hope has ebbed and flowed among many in the computer
business that Linux, a freely available computer operating system
which uses a penguin as its symbol, would become a viable alternative
to Microsoft's Windows, the near universal standard for the world's
personal computers. The industryng to Jonathan Schwartz, Sun's chief
operating officer.

Is this the beginning of the end for Microsoft's virtual monopoly on
the desktop? Certainly not right away, says Al Gillen, an analyst at
IDC, a technology consultancy. Today, almost 94% of all PCs in the
world run on Windows, while slightly more than 3% A series of worms
and viruses has wrought havoc on Windows PCs. Microsoft faced further
embarrassment this week when it warned about more security flaws in
its software. Meanwhile Linux, which hackers tend not to target, looks
safe in comparison. And distrust of Microsoft as a bullying monopolist
remains high. Last month, the European Commission fined the companythe
lawyers, consultants, accountants and so forth who use presentation
applications, spreadsheets, fancy graphics and the like. Linux is
perfect, on the other hand, for call centres, cash tellers,
customer-support departments and other types of work that require
employees to use only the same one or two computer functions (and whom
their employers might actually want to discourage from goofing off
with other applications while on the job). Instead of th e, says Mr
Fink, he is targeting th e. 

That casts a different light on Linux's future on the PC. Companies
such as HP do not see it as a way to make money, but as a way for them
to drive sales of server computers in company data-centres as part of
a complete Linu x. And Sun, according to Pip Coburn, an analyst at
UBS, a bank, probabl y

So Microsoft may not need to worry about Linux on PCs all that
much. Insofar as it can point to competition from Linux, as it has
been doing with Apple, a s that it is not a monopoly, Linux may even
help Microsoft in its legal battles. 

But the future is uncertain, and Linux still might yet represent
another kind of threat to the company. No standard operating system
has yet emerged for mobile handsets, robots, watches, televisions,
printers, car gadgets and other such devices. Microsoft, naturally,
wants to extend Windows' dominance to these as well. It is here,
rather than the desktop, that Linux could be a real threat to the
mighty company's ambitions.

