Cyprus 

A derailment coming

Apr 15th 2004 | NICOSIA 
From The Economist print edition


AFP 
 
 

 

Greek-Cypriots will sa y to a UN peace proposal and therefore march
alone into the European Union 

Get article background

ON THEIR side of the divided capital of Cyprus, young Turkish-Cypriots
wearing T-shirts stamped with Evet (the Turkish for yes) are
campaigning noisily in favour of reunifying the island. Hundreds of
blue and yellow balloonsh-Cypriots think. All signs are that the
Greek-Cypriots will reject the UN plan, and therefore exercise their
right to join the EU alone.

The buoyant mood in the north is in sharp contrast to the sullen
reaction of most Greek-Cypriots to the UN proposals. Billboards in
southern Nicosia, which normally promote the latest cell-phones,
feature the word Ochi (Greek for no) against a depressing dark
background. Television screens are filled with nationalist politicians
rehearsing the peace plan's drawbacks. Surveys suggest that only
12-15% of Greek-Cypriots are certain to endorse it.

This is not surprising. For in an emotional address that tugged on the
deepest impulses in the Greek nationalist psyche, President Tassos
Papadopoulos called on April 7th for a resounding rejection of the UN
blueprint. After all, he implied, Greek Cyprus will on May 1st be
entering the EU as a full memberncluding two ex-presidents) have
warned against  a vote; the Greek government said tepidly on April
15th the plan had mor e but Cypriots must decide. The Greek-Cypriot
voters seem more swayed by the rhetoric of Mr Papadopoulos, who has
pointed up the plan's faults and played down the drawbacks of
rejection.

To any long-standing observer of the Cyprus question, a peculiar
reversal is going on. At least since the bloody summer of 1974, Turkey
and its Cypriot kin have enjoyed substantial powerd voted accordingly
at the UN.

In theory, both sides have been committed since 1977 to reuniting the
island as a bizonal federation. But Greek-Cypriot sincerity was rarely
tested because Rauf Denktash, the Turkish-Cypriot leader, was
obligingly prepared to act as nay-sayer when a settlement looked
likely. 

Now the old balance is about to be reversed. The Turkish-Cypriots will
earn a great many moral points by voting for the UN peace plan, while
the Greek-Cypriots will make themselves deeply unpopular by their
churlish rejection. But at least in their president's view, they can
afford to be sanguine because they will soon enjoy the substantial
benefit, which nobody can take away, of EU membership.

This is not how anyone planned things when, nearly five years ago, the
Union declared that it was ready in principle to admit Turkeyons to
Turkish membership; and was intended to promote  a solution in Cyprus
which Mr Denktash, wary of any threat to his well-armed fief, could
not veto.

In one of its aims, the EU strategy has partially succeeded: that of
giving heart to pro-European moderates both among the Turkish-Cypriots
and in Turkey itself. Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey's mildly Islamist
prime minister, has devoted enormous political capital to persuading
reluctant generalseen emboldened to oppose Mr Denktash, whose
unrecognised republic has a habit of prosecuting his critics. That in
turn has strengthened the hand of Mr Erdogan in Ankara as he tries to
overcome the foot-dragging power of conservative generals. The prime
minister hopes that in December he will be rewarded for these efforts
by a longed-for prize: a firm date for the start of negotiationsyprus
 a with the potential to become  a. Mr Papadopoulos was never going to
 be a popular figure in Brussels, given his history of support for
 Serbian nationalism in the 1990s. But he may not care: any decisions
 on further enlargement require his assent, and in theory he can
 exercise that veto if he wants.

Carl Bildt, a former Swedish prime minister and UN envoy to the
Balkans, has suggested that European leaders treat Mr Papadopoulos as
a pariah. Charles Grant of the Centre for European Reform, a
think-tank, argues that the Greek-Cypriots will see a collapse in
thei r of France's ruling UMP party said this month they would oppose
early talks on Turkey's EU membership. How well it would suit them if
Greek-Cypriot hotheads did the derailing, and then suffered the
effects of the crisis which this policy may trigger. 



