General relativity 

Turn, turn, turn

Apr 15th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


A new satellite will test Einstein's magnum opus

IT WAS the moment that catapulted Albert Einstein to world fame. In
1919, two teams of British astronomers led by Sir Arthur Eddington
journeyed to the southern hemisphere to observe a solar
eclipse. Einstein's general theory of relativity, an explanation of
how gravity works, predicts that the sun bends light that passes close
to its surface a few degrees off-course. That will cause stars in the
same part of the sky as the sun to look out of place. Because of the
sun's overpowering brightness, such a deviation cannot normally be
observed. But with the sun's disc obliterated by the eclipsing moon,
Eddington's colleagues were able to confirm the deviation was as
Einstein said it should be, and that Newton's model of gravity, then
two centuries old, was wrong.

A triumph. But experimental tests of general relativity since then
have been few and far between. So the launch of Gravity Probe B, a
spacecraft that is scheduled to lift off from Vandenberg Air Force
Base in California at 10.01am on April 17th, has a particular
significance for physicists. 

Using a near-perfect set of gyroscopes, Gravity Probe B will test two
predictions made by general relativity. One, the geodetic effect, has
been measured before by bouncing lasers off the moon, but the new
measurements will be 20 times more precise. The other, frame-dragging,
has never been measured before.

The geodetic effect is caused by a distortion that the Earth's mass
makes in the fabric of space. This distortion should cause the
gyroscopes to wobble on their axes massive bodies rotate. (In essence,
such bodies drag space round with them.) Frame-dragging is predicted
to cause an additional precession of one hundred-thousandth of a
degree, perpendicular to that caused by the geodetic effect.

To measure that, the four gyroscopes in Gravity Probe B are made of
fused quartz spheres, which will not expand or contract as the
temperature changes. These spheres have been polished so perfectly
that, if they were magnified to be the size of the Earth, the
blemishes on their surfaces would be less than five metres high. 

These perfect spheres are coated with niobium, a metal which, when
kept close to absolute zero, is a superconductor. A spinning
superconductor creates a magnetic field whose direction indicates its
axis of rotation it all, the rocket that will put Gravity Probe B into
orbit has to be launched within  a a mere one second long if it is to
deliver its payload into the correct orbit. If it misses this window,
further opportunities occur at intervals of 23 hours and 56 minutes