AIDS in India 

Abating, or exploding?

Apr 15th 2004 | CHENNAI 
From The Economist print edition


Katz 
 
 

 

India's HIV epidemic is at a critical stage. If it is not brought
under control soon, it may grow to African proportions

Get article background

INDIA'S first cases of HIV infection occurred among prostitutes in
Chennai back in 1986, when the city was still known as Madras. That
was two years after HIV was first reported in Thailand, where a large
proportion of men habitually used prostitutes and habitually did not
use condoms. A few years later, over a quarter of young men and a
tenth of pregnant women in some Thai provinces were infected. The
outlook for Thailand was bleak. But by then it had launched an
anti-AIDS campaign. It worked: by 2020 the country should be close to
HIV-free.

The Thais adopted six policies in particular: evaluation and
monitoring of the outbreak; a concentration of effort on high-risk
groups; general education about HIV and AIDS, combined with  a and a
campaign to dispel the stigma associated with the disease;
collaboration among as many people as possible on all fronts;
international support; and political will.

India, of course, is not Thailand. For a start, Thailand is much
richer (its GDP per person in 2001 was $6,400, whereas India's was
$2,840). Thailand is also much smaller than India, making a national
campaign much easier to conduct. Lastly, the Thais have long been
relatively relaxed about sexual mores, and by 1990 had become
accustomed to treating condoms as casually as soap or toothpaste. On
the other hand, India has had at least ten years in which to see how
AIDS can ravage an entire continent, decimate populations and set
development back decades. It should know both what to do and what not
to do. So how does it measure up?

Much better than a year ago, you will be told by those directing the
battle from the capital, Delhi. One big departure was the convening of
a parliamentary forum last July, attended by elected officials of all
parties from all over India. It involved representatives high and low,
from the prime minister down to the presidents of some panchayats, the
lowest units of local government. Although at the time it seemed to
produce little more than words, it gave much-needed encouragement to
the efforts that had hitherto been conducted in a political vacuum or,
some would say, in the face of outright official hostility.

In any event, the forum was followed in November by an announcement
that the government would, from April 1st 2004, start to provide free
anti-retroviral drugs to a limited number of AIDS sufferers, welcome
both in itself as a life-extender for the beneficiaries and as a
signal to others that such people were not outcasts. This was
strengthened by a promise to bring in anti-discrimination laws. Then
came the statementHIV-positive men losing their jobs, of women
infected by their husbands and cast out by their in-laws, of AIDS
sufferers stoned to deathprominent, though Britain's and America's
bilateral agencies, among others, are also heavily involved. The big
boost last year, though, was the announcement that the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation would double its spending in India to $200m
over five years. That has since been trumped by the decision last
month to make India eligible message across. Each year for the next
three years it will provide about $4.65m-worth of airtime for
public-service advertisements about AIDS. It will also carry
information and messages in drama series and other programmes, using
different channels according to the target, whether young people,
Hindi-speakers or Tamils.

The BBC World Service Trust has already shown how effective television
and radio can be. Drawing on a successful anti-leprosy campaign in
India and Nepal, it launched a similar campaign against AIDS in India
in 2002, with more than 1,000 broadcasts aimed at reaching over half
the population. The programmes included a reality youth show, a radio
phone-in on personal health matters and, most successfully, an
interactive drama featuring an HIV-positive detective, Jasoos Vijay,
regularly watched by over 150m people. These programmes were
accompanied by 3,500 video screenings in villages with limited access
to television and radio.

 
 
 

 
Other companies, such as the Tata Group and Indian Railways, are also
active. It is striking, however, that many if not all of the most
committed companies are either foreign-ownedmied, the man who runs the
company, thumbs his nose at the patents taken out by the rich-country
companies that developed these drugs. They hate him, both for what
they see as his piracy and for the embarrassment his pricing policy
(or theirs) causes them . he says ,

His own government also finds Mr Hamied a bit of an embarrassment. His
rip-off drugmaking is not illegal in India, but his very public
pronouncements often put the Indian authorities on the spot. He has
offered, for instance, to provide them with free nevirapine, an
anti-retroviral that greatly reduces the chances of transmitting HIV
from mother to baby during birth. That was in 2000, yet they have
take n. 

As long ago as 1993, after an approach by the government, Mr Hamied
offered AZT, another AIDS drug, at its cost of $2 a day, a sixth of
the international price, but the government had no money. Now, like
Vidur Kaushik, the boss of SRL Ranbaxy, he says he could make his
products even more cheaply if only the government would lift some
duties and taxes on imports of reagents and equipment.



Only with a condom, please
Not far from Cipla's headquarters in Mumbai is Kamathipura, the city's
red-light district. For the prostitutes there who regularly queue up
at the back of a white van serving as a mobile clinic, the price of
drugs is, for the moment, less important than the price of
condoms. Fortunately, the People's Health Organisation, a
non-governmental group set up by Ishwarprasad Gilada, hands them out
free. 

The women, bejewelled with studs through noses and ears, and clad in
bright sarees, seem cheerful. You might wonder why. They live in
brothels four or five to a room, with 120 or 150 other women. Many
will have been sold to the brothel owner by a husband or father, for a
sum that has to be paid off but never is. If they flee back to the
village from which they came, the brothel-owner will tell the village
and the prostitutemercial sex worker, or CSW, as the jargon has itare
drunk. Moreover, if the prostitute insists, the client may think she
is infected, and bang goes her only chance of making 500 rupees ($11)
that day (these women are doing well: the typical charge is more like
50 rupees). 

The prostitutes are members of one of the high-risk groups that the
authorities are seeking to reach0, 20 or 30 days; one has not seen his
for over two months. As they are shown the correct way to put on a
condom, one remarks that his only experience of such a product has
been to use it to bind a leaking pipe in his lorry. They would like to
know more about where to have an HIV test. Only one has been tested.

India, you might conclude, is doing the right things. By testing
mothers in clinics and hospitals at nearly 60 0 sites across the
country it has tried to assess the size of the problem. In 1992, with
World Bank money, the government set up a National AIDS Control
Organisation (NACO), to bypass bureaucracy and oversee the anti-AIDS
campaign, and state AIDS-control societies have been active since 1998
(health is a state responsibility in India).

NACO has identified high-risk groupsxcise duties, machines to monitor
infected people's blood (150 are needed it said, at about $30,000
each). 

The good work goes on. Education campaigns are under way, NGOs are
mobilised and, goodness knows, international support is forthcoming
with money and advice. And yet the effort seems almost pathetically
inadequate to the task.

Take, just for a start, the magnitude of the problem. No one really
knows what it is: the statistics, in the words of one onlooker, ar
e. Another, Dr Gilada, reckons 8m-12m Indians are HIV-positive, and he
may be in a position to know: his clinic in Mumbaiion of the six
(Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Manipur, Nagaland and Tamil
Nadu) is 292m people, nearly 30% of the total. Three others (Goa,
Gujarat and Pondicherry, with 53m people all told) hav e epidemics,
with prevalence rates of 5% or more among the high-risk groups.

Admittedly, some of the statistics may overstate the problem. In
general, the epidemic seems worse in the south, though it is
acknowledged to be bad in parts of the north-east, close to Myanmar,
where many people inject drugs with shared needles. The south is
certainly where most of the effort is concentrated.

Yet it is not clear whether comfort should be drawn from this
coincidence of epidemic and effort. The south generally has better
social indicators than the north, better health care, better education
and probably better reporting . though , remarked UNAIDS last
November. The situation there may be worse than is commonly
appreciated.

And everywhere, north and south, the difficulties are formidable. Too
much time has been lost. The country was in denial for five years
while the disease was taking hold among certain groups. Survey after
survey suggests that, despite much progress, much remains to be
done. For example, some 61% of women in Orissa have never heard of
AIDS, reported one survey in February. Though the proportion of
truckers in Tamil Nadu who reported paying for sex declined from 38%
in 1996 to 17% in 2001, it rose to 21% in 2002. Only 37% reported
using a condom with a casual partner. And though 90% of female
prostitutes in Tamil Nadu now say they use a condom, only 45% of male
homosexuals report having used one in their most recent anal-sex
encounter. And so on.



The vast task ahead
Travel round India, and see and hear how, despite the efforts of so
many dedicated people, the problems abound. One reason the condom
campaign is not working, for instance, is that it is aimed only at
high-risk groups, yet in at least six states HIV has spread to the
general population, with housewives and teenagers among those
infected. Anyway, how do you reach India's prostitutes when they work
in so many different wayss more concerned with pride than with
prevention: the disbursal of a $100m grant from the Global Fund to
Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria has been delayed because of
objections about the requirement that the money can be released
quarterly only if performance is satisfactory.

Efforts to reach high-risk groups are hampered by the fact that
prostitution and homosexuality are both illegal, despite talk of
changing the law. The stigma attached to anything to do with AIDS
remains huge, especially for women, whose poverty, low status and
relative powerlessness put them at a huge disadvantage. And, for all
the activities of some companies, Indian business, as one of its
practitioners-turned-activists puts it, is doin g. 

Against such a background, forecasts of millions more infections seem
horribly plausible. Yet similar forecasts were made for Thailand and
Brazil and were proved wrong, thanks to committed intervention. It is
not yet too late for India, not quite. 
