India's election 

The greatest show on earth

Apr 15th 2004 | DELHI AND LUCKNOW 
From The Economist print edition


AP 
 
 

 

A contest less of policies than of opportunistic alliances

Get article background

 says Pramod Mahajan, a strategist with India's Bharatiya Janata Party
 (BJP), of the resounding victory he expects in the general election
 that begins on April 20th. Just what a spin doctor might be expected
 to say, but opinion polls and analysts all agree that the BJP is
 likely to emerge again as the largest party in India's parliament,
 and that the multi-party coalition it has led since 1998, the
 National Democratic Alliance, is the favourite to form the
 government. The biggest opposition party, Congress, is expected to
 remain just that.

The campaign has been, by local standards, a tame affair. Such
judgments are, of course, relative. In Kashmir, where separatist
militants are boycotting the polls, senior politicians narrowly
escaped being among the 11 people killed by a bomb at a rally on April
8th. In Jharkhand, in the east, Maoist guerrillas killed 26 policemen
with a landmine explosion on the same day. In Bihar, two days later,
three workers for one political party were shot dead in two separate
attacks.

But the violence has to be seen in the context of the mind-boggling
scale of an Indian election. There are si x parties, dozens of
regional ones, and thousands of candidates. They are vying for the
favours of 670m voters, of whom, judging by the past few polls, some
60% will turn out, about ten percentage points more, for example, than
in the 2000 American presidential election. There are over 700,000
polling stations, with 1,075,000 electronic voting machines. To enable
officials and security forces to get to where they are needed, there
will be four rounds of voting, culminating on May 10th, with the
results to be announced three days later.

This is the first general election in which all voting and counting
will be electronic, by pushing buttons on sturdy-looking plastic boxes
the size of a computer keyboard, connected by a cable to  a that
resembles a large desktop calculator. They appear tamper-proofst
month, for example, Vijai Sharma, the chief electoral officer of the
northern state of Uttar Pradesh, banned an 11-tonne sweet. An activist
in the state capital, Lucknow, wanted to offer the world's biggest
Indian laddoo at a temple, for the good health of India's prime
minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee. Since Mr Vajpayee is the local member
of parliament and standing for re-election, Mr Sharma ruled that the
laddoo had to be seen as part of his campaign. The electoral code bars
the use of places of worship for campaigning.

 
 
 

 
The watchdogs were unable, however, to prevent an apparent exercise in
vote-buying that led to a disaster. On April 12th over 20 women and
children were killed at a rally in Lucknow, ostensibly to mark the
birthday of a leader in Uttar Pradesh of Mr Vajpayee's BJP. They died
in a stampede to secure sarees that were being handed out free of
charge.



Technical default
This embarrassment for the BJP also highlights how hollow one of its
main campaign themesidow of Rajiv Gandhi, a former prime
minister. But, despite its roots in a Hindu fundamentalist movement,
the BJP is playing dow n issues, such as the Ayodhya temple, and is
fielding more Muslim candidates. It has been restrained in office by
its partners in the alliance, many of whom are reluctant to alienate
India's 130m-strong Muslim minority. But in another blow for the BJP's
image on April 12th, the Supreme Court ordered a retrial in a murder
case arising from a pogrom against Muslims in 2002 in the state of
Gujarat, where the BJP-run state government is accused of complicity
in the terror and of sabotaging the judicial follow-up.

Congress is campaigning as the party of India's secular traditions, as
well as of the poor, especially those in the countryside, for whom the
fast-growing economy is just a distant rumour. Its economic manifesto,
however, offers not so much a radical change of course as a vague hope
of increasing the annual growth rate to 10%. 

AFP 
 
 
Contenders Gandhi, S. and Vajpayee
 


One Congress leader, Salman Khurshid, argues this is largely  a
election, less about policies than about forging competing alliances
with smaller regional and caste-based parties across India's 28 states
and seve n, which have less autonomy. 

It is true that the next government will almost certainly be another
coalition, and the count will be followed by a bout of frantic
political horse-trading. The BJP hopes to improve on its showing in
the last election, in 1999, when it won 182 out of 545 seats. But even
Mr Mahajan says it would b e were it to get about 200 seats, so it
will continue to rely on the National Democratic Alliance, albeit in a
revamped form. 

Congress, which ruled India for most of its first half-century of
independence, and is still the only truly national party, has shed its
traditional aversion t o and has already shared seat allocations with
a strong local coalition partner in four of the six biggest states,
with a total of 169 seats (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra and
Tamil Nadu). It hopes for more than the 112 seats it won last
time. But even party strategists say the maximum it can achieve is
around 135.



The anvil in the north
One reason for the modesty of this ambition is the dire outlook for
Congress in Uttar Pradesh, India's largest state, with 170m people and
80 out of the 545 seats in parliament. Congress holds only nine of
them, and may well lose some of those. This state is where, to a large
extent, India's general elections are decided. It is home not just to
Ayodhya and Mr Vajpayee's constituency. It is also where Congress's
Mrs Gandhi is contesting a seat, as did her late husband and her
mother-in-law, another former prime minister. For the first time, Mrs
Gandhi's son, Rahul, is also standing in a family stronghold.

 
 
 

 


The state is a case study in many of the ills besetting Indian
politics: not just of constituencies handed down like family
heirlooms; but also of venal, sometimes thuggish and often outright
criminal candidates; of parties appealing not on the basis of policies
but of narrow regional or caste interests; of coalitions formed not
out of like-minded ideologies but out of naked power-seeking. 

In Uttar Pradesh, there are no election issues, except, in Mr
Khurshid's words , failed to woo either of two possible partners: the
Samajwadi, or Socialist, party, led by Uttar Pradesh's present chief
minister, Mulayam Singh Yadav, with a strong support base among other
backward castes and Muslims; and the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) led by
Mayawati, a former chief minister, and famous dalit champion. 

Congress's only hope in the state and perhaps in the country as a
whole a from the enthusiasm that has greeted Rahul Gandhi and his
sister Priyanka, who has also been campaigning. Despite their youth
both are in their early 30s and inexperience, they have drawn big
crowds: their father, grandmother and great-grandfather were all prime
minister. Congress contrasts their vitality with Mr Vajpayee, who is
79. Though an old man, he gives no sign of being in a hurry. But
neither, for now, do the youthful Gandhis, believing that time, as
well as ancestry, is on their side.

